<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

    <!ENTITY Amacr   CDATA "&#x0100;"   --     155 -->
    <!ENTITY Ddotb   CDATA "&#x1E0C;"   --      25 -->
    <!ENTITY Imacr   CDATA "&#x012A;"   --      14 -->
    <!ENTITY Ndotb   CDATA "&#x1E46;"   --       6 -->
    <!ENTITY Rdotb   CDATA "&#x1E5A;"   --      47 -->
    <!ENTITY Sacute  CDATA "&#x015A;"   --       4 -->
    <!ENTITY Sdotb   CDATA "&#x1E62;"   --       4 -->
    <!ENTITY Tdotb   CDATA "&#x1E6C;"   --      15 -->
    <!ENTITY Umacr   CDATA "&#x016A;"   --      18 -->
    <!ENTITY amacr   CDATA "&#x0101;"   --    9536 -->
    <!ENTITY apos    CDATA "&#x2019;"   --     946 -->
    <!ENTITY ddotb   CDATA "&#x1E0D;"   --     354 -->
    <!ENTITY edotb   CDATA "&#x1EB9;"   --       1 -->
    <!ENTITY emacr   CDATA "&#x0113;"   --       2 -->
    <!ENTITY hbarb   CDATA "&#x1E96;"   --       3 -->
    <!ENTITY hdotb   CDATA "&#x1E25;"   --     377 -->
    <!ENTITY imacr   CDATA "&#x012B;"   --    2017 -->
    <!ENTITY kdotb   CDATA "&#x1E33;"   --       1 -->
    <!ENTITY ldotb   CDATA "&#x1E37;"   --       3 -->
    <!ENTITY ldquo   CDATA "&#x201C;"   --       7 -->
    <!ENTITY lsquo   CDATA "&#x2018;"   --     222 -->
    <!ENTITY mdash   CDATA "&#x2014;"   --     126 -->
    <!ENTITY mdota   CDATA "&#x1E41;"   --     543 -->
    <!ENTITY mdotb   CDATA "&#x1E43;"   --       4 -->
    <!ENTITY nacute  CDATA "&#x0144;"   --       7 -->
    <!ENTITY nbsp    CDATA "&#x00A0;"   --      25 -->
    <!ENTITY ndash   CDATA "&#x2013;"   --     327 -->
    <!ENTITY ndota   CDATA "&#x1E45;"   --     228 -->
    <!ENTITY ndotb   CDATA "&#x1E47;"   --    1633 -->
    <!ENTITY nmacr   CDATA "n&#x0304;"  --     296 -->
    <!ENTITY oelig   CDATA "&#x0153;"   --       2 -->
    <!ENTITY omacr   CDATA "&#x014D;"   --       2 -->
    <!ENTITY rdotb   CDATA "&#x1E5B;"   --     681 -->
    <!ENTITY rdquo   CDATA "&#x201D;"   --       7 -->
    <!ENTITY rsquo   CDATA "&#x2019;"   --     221 -->
    <!ENTITY sacute  CDATA "&#x015B;"   --       1 -->
    <!ENTITY sdotb   CDATA "&#x1E63;"   --    1504 -->
    <!ENTITY tdotb   CDATA "&#x1E6D;"   --    1074 -->
    <!ENTITY umacr   CDATA "&#x016B;"   --     878 -->

]>
<TEI.2 lang=en>
<teiHeader>
<fileDesc>
<titleStmt>
<title nfc=4>The Sanskrit drama in its origin, development, theory &amp; practice</title>
<author key="Keith, Arthur Berriedale" ref="https://viaf.org/viaf/17293531/">Arthur Berriedale Keith (1879&ndash;1944)</author>
<respStmt><resp>Transcription</resp> <name key="Hellingman, Jeroen">Jeroen Hellingman</name></respStmt>
</titleStmt>
<publicationStmt>
<publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
<pubPlace>Urbana, Illinois, USA.</pubPlace>
<idno type=LCCN>#####</idno>
<idno type=OLN>#####</idno>
<idno type=OLW>#####</idno>
<idno type=OCLC>#####</idno>
<idno type=LibThing>#####</idno>
<idno type=PGclearance>20230920114721keith</idno>
<idno type=PGDPProjectId>projectID650c1a06a5a27</idno>
<idno type=PGSrc>74314-Keith-The-Sanskrit-drama</idno>
<idno type=epub-id>urn:uuid:50e394a5-29a3-426c-a8f3-69cab8c07999</idno>
<idno type=PGnum>74314</idno>
<date>2024-08-25</date>
<availability>
<p>&availability.en;

<p>This eBook is produced by the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at <xref url="https://www.pgdp.net/">www.pgdp.net</xref>.


<!--
Source: https://archive.org/details/TheSanskritDramaA.B.Keith/
Alt: https://archive.org/details/sanskritdrama0000unse/page/n5/mode/2up

Author's other works: https://archive.org/search?query=creator%3A%22Keith%2C+Arthur+Berriedale%2C+1879-1944%22


FIND:       \n\n\n<p>([0-9]+)\. (<hi>[Ça-z0-9,.'&; -]+</hi>\.?)\n\n
REPLACE:    \n\n\n<div2 n=\1>\n<head><ab type=divNum>\1.</ab> \2</head>\n\n
-->

</availability>
</publicationStmt>
<notesStmt>
    <note type=Credits>Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net/ for Project Gutenberg.</note>
</notesStmt>
<sourceDesc>
<bibl>
<author>Arthur Berriedale Keith</author>
<title>The Sanskrit drama in its origin, development, theory &amp; practice</title>
<date>1924</date>
</bibl>
</sourceDesc>
</fileDesc>
<encodingDesc>
    <tagsDecl lang=zxx>
        <rendition selector=.xs>font-size: x-small;</rendition>
        <rendition selector=.small>font-size: small;</rendition>
        <rendition selector=.large>font-size: large;</rendition>
        <rendition selector=.vam>vertical-align: middle;</rendition>
        <rendition selector=.center>text-align: center;</rendition>
    </tagsDecl>
    <p>Apparent errors in this book have been corrected (with those corrections listed in the colophon). 
    
    <p>The Sanskrit transliteration in this book uses the <hi>ç</hi> for <SA>"sa</SA> and <hi>&nmacr;</hi> for <SA>"na</SA> where modern conventions use <hi>&sacute;</hi> and <hi>&ndota;</hi> respectively. This has not been changed.</p>

    <p>In addition to the sources given in the <ref target=abbr>list of abbreviations</ref>, the following works have also been referenced:

    <table>
        <row><cell>BEFEO.  <cell lang=fr>Bulletin de l&apos;École Française d'Extrême-Orient.
        <row><cell>BKM.    <cell>B&rdotb;hatkath&amacr;mañjar&imacr;.
        <row><cell>DKC.    <cell>Daçakum&amacr;racarita.
        <row><cell>ERE.    <cell>L. H. Gray, Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics.
        <row><cell>KSS.    <cell>Kath&amacr;sarits&amacr;gara.
        <row><cell>NS.     <cell>Nir&ndotb;aya S&amacr;gara (Press).
    </table>

    <p>As well as the following:

    <list>
        <item>Bendall, Brit. Mus. Catal.: C. Bendall, Catalogue of the Sanskrit manuscripts in the British Museum.
        <item>Bhandarkar, R. G., Report (1897): R. G. Bhandarkar, Report on the search for Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Bombay Presidency, during the years 1887&ndash;88, 1888&ndash;89, 1889&ndash;90 and 1890&ndash;91 (publ. Bombay, 1897).
        <item>Bhandarkar, Report (1907): S. R. Bhandarkar, Report of a second tour in search of Sanskrit manuscripts made in Rajputana and Central India in 1904&ndash;5 and 1905&ndash;6.
        <item lang=la>Epigr. Ind.: Epigraphia Indica.
        <item>Harapras&amacr;d, Nepal Catal.: Hara Pras&amacr;d &Sacute;&amacr;stri, A Catalogue of palm-leaf and selected paper Mss. belonging to the Durbar Library, Nepal.
        <item>Harapras&amacr;d, Report (1901): Report on the search of Sanskrit manuscripts (1895 to 1900).
        <item>Hultszch, Reports: E. Hultszch, Reports On Sanskrit Manuscripts In Southern India.
        <item>India Office Catal.: Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the library of the India Office.
        <item>Keith, Sansk. Lit.: A. B. Keith, A history of Sanskrit literature.
        <item>Lassen, Anth. Sanscr.: Ch. Lassen, <foreign lang=la>Anthologia Sanscritica glossario instructa</foreign>.
        <item>Peterson, Reports: P. Peterson, Three Reports on a search for Sanskrit manuscripts, with a Index of Books.
        <item>Peterson, Subh&amacr;&sdotb;it&amacr;vali: The Subhâshitâvali Of Vallabhacharya, edited by P. Peterson and Pandit Durgâprasâda.
        <item>R&amacr;jendral&amacr;lamitra, Bikaner Catal.: Rájendralála Mitra, A Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Library of His Highness the Mahárájá of Bikáner.
        <item lang=fr>Regnaud, Rhétorique sanskrite: P. Regnaud, La Rhétorique sanskrite exposée dans son développement historique et ses rapports avec la rhétorique classique.
        <item>Ridgeway&apos;s Dramas, &amp;c.: W. Ridgeway, The dramas and dramatic dances of non-European races in special reference to the origin of Greek tragedy, with an appendix on the origin of Greek comedy.
        <item>Seshagiri, Report for 1896&ndash;97: Seshagiri Sastri, Report on a search for Sanskrit and Tamil manuscripts for the year 1896&ndash;97.
        <item>Wilson: H. H. Wilson, Select Specimens of the Theatre of the Hindus (2nd ed.), 2 vols.
        <item lang=de>Windisch, Sansk. Phil.: E. Windisch, Geschichte der Sanskrit-Philologie und indischen Altertumskunde.
    </list>

    </p>
</encodingDesc>
<profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
        <language id=en>English</language>
        <language id=de>German</language>
        <language id=fr>French</language>
        <language id=la>Latin</language>
        <language id=nl>Dutch</language>
        <language id=it>Italian</language>
        <language id=sa>Sanskrit</language>
        <language id=sa-Latn>Sanskrit (Latin transcription)</language>
        <language id=grc>Greek (Classical)</language>
        <language id=grc-Latn>Greek (Classical; Latin transcription)</language>
        <language id=zxx>No linguistic content</language>
    </langUsage>
    <textClass>
        <keywords>
            <list>
                <item>#####</item>
            </list>
        </keywords>
    </textClass>
    <listPrefixDef>
        <prefixDef ident="f" matchPattern="(.+)" replacementPattern="https://www.pgdp.net/c/tools/page_browser.php?project=projectID650c1a06a5a27&amp;imagefile=$1.png&amp;mode=image">
    </listPrefixDef>
</profileDesc>
<revisionDesc>
    <list>
        <item>2024-07-26 Started.
    </list>
</revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text rend="stylesheet(style/classic.css)">
<front id=frontmatter>
<div1 id=cover type=Cover>


<p><figure id=cover-image rend="image(images/new-cover.jpg)">
<figDesc>Newly Designed Front Cover.</figDesc>
</figure>



<pb id=pb1 facs="f:001">
<div1 id=french type=FrenchTitle>


<p rend="center large">THE
<lb>SANSKRIT DRAMA



<pb n=3 id=pb3 facs="f:003">
<div1 id=titlepage type=TitlePage>


<p><figure id=titlepage-image rend="image(images/titlepage.png)">
<figDesc>Original Title Page.</figDesc>
</figure>



<titlePage>
<docTitle><titlePart>THE
<lb>SANSKRIT DRAMA</titlePart>

<titlePart type=sub>in its
<lb>Origin, Development
<lb>Theory &amp; Practice</titlePart>
</docTitle>

<byline>BY
<docAuthor>A. BERRIEDALE KEITH, D.C.L., <hi rend=sc>D.Litt.</hi></docAuthor>

<lb>Of the Inner Temple, Barrister-at-Law, and of the Scottish Bar
<lb>Regius Professor of Sanskrit &amp; Comparative Philology at the University of Edinburgh
<lb>Author of &lsquo;Buddhist Philosophy in India and Ceylon&rsquo;, &amp;c.
</byline>

<!-- [Illustration] -->


<docImprint>GEOFFREY CUMBERLEGE
<lb>OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
</docImprint>
</titlePage>



<pb n=4 id=pb4 facs="f:004">
<div1 id=imprint type=Imprint>


<p rend="center small"><hi>Oxford University Press, Amen House, London E.C. 4</hi>

<p rend="center xs">GLASGOW NEW YORK TORONTO MELBOURNE WELLINGTON <lb>BOMBAY CALCUTTA MADRAS KARACHI CAPE TOWN IBADAN

<p rend="center small"><hi>Geoffrey Cumberlege, Publisher to the University</hi>

<p rend="center small">FIRST PUBLISHED 1924
<lb>REPRINTED LITHOGRAPHICALLY 1954

<p rend="center small">PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN






<pb n=5 id=pb5 facs="f:005">
<div1 id=preface type=Preface>
<head>PREFACE</head>


<p>Thirty-two years have elapsed since the appearance of Professor Sylvain Lévi&apos;s admirable treatise, <hi lang=fr>Le théâtre indien</hi>, the first adequate sketch of the origin and development of the Indian drama and of Indian dramatic theory. Since then the discovery of important fragments of the dramas of the great Buddhist poet Açvagho&sdotb;a, and of the plays of the famous Bh&amacr;sa, has thrown unexpected light on the early history of the drama in India; the question of the origin of the drama has been the subject of elaborate investigation by Professors von Schroeder, Pischel, Hertel, Sir W. Ridgeway, Lüders, Konow, and myself; and the real significance and value of the Indian theory of the dramatic art have been brought out by the labours of Professor Jacobi. The time is therefore ripe for a fresh investigation of the origin and development of the drama in the light of the new materials available.

<p>To bring the subject matter within moderate compass, I have confined it to the drama in Sanskrit or Pr&amacr;krit, omitting any reference to vernacular dramas. I have also omitted from the account of the theory of drama all minor detail which appeared to have no more than the interest of ingenuity in subdivision and classification; I have had the less hesitation in doing so, because I have no doubt that the value and depth of the Indian theory of poetics have failed to receive recognition, simply because in the original sources what is important and what is valueless are presented in almost inextricable confusion. In tracing the development of the drama, I have laid stress only on the great writers and on dramatists who wrote before the end of the first millennium; of later works I have selected a few typical specimens for description; it seemed needless to dwell on plays which in the main show an excessive dependence <pb n=6 id=pb6 facs="f:006">on older models and on the text-books of dramatic theory, and whose chief merit, when they have any, lies in skill and taste in versification. Valuable bibliographies of the dramas are contained in Mr. Montgomery Schuyler&apos;s <hi>Bibliography of the Sanskrit Drama</hi> (1906), and in Professor Konow&apos;s treatise, and it has seemed needless to do more than refer to the most important and accessible editions of the plays mentioned and to treatises which have appeared since the publication of these works.

<p>Though the limits of space available have precluded any full investigation of the style of the dramatists, I have not followed Professor Lévi in leaving this aspect out of consideration. The translations given of the passages cited are intended merely to convey the main sense; I have therefore left without discussion difficulties of interpretation and allusion, and have resorted to prose. Verse translations from Sanskrit sometimes attain very real merit, but normally only in a way which has little affinity with Sanskrit poetry. H. H. Wilson&apos;s versions of Sanskrit dramas in his <hi>Theatre of the Hindus</hi> for this reason, and also because the prose of the dramas is turned into verse, thus fail, despite their many intrinsic merits, to convey any precise idea of the effect of a Sanskrit drama.

<p>I am indebted to my wife for much assistance and criticism.


<p rend=signed>A. BERRIEDALE KEITH.

<p rend=dateline><hi rend=sc>Edinburgh University</hi>,
<lb><hi>April, 1923</hi>.






<pb n=7 id=pb7 facs="f:007">
<div1 id=toc type=Contents>
<head>CONTENTS</head>


<p>PART I. <ref target=pt1>THE ORIGIN OF THE SANSKRIT DRAMA</ref>

<p><ab type=tocPageNum>PAGE</ab>

<list type=tocList>
<item><ab type=tocDivNum>I.</ab> <ref target=ch1>Dramatic Elements in Vedic Literature.</ref>
    <list type=tocList>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>1.</ab> <ref target=ch1.1>The Indian Tradition of the Origin of the Drama</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>12</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>2.</ab> <ref target=ch1.2>The Dialogues of the Veda</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>13</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>3.</ab> <ref target=ch1.3>Dramatic Elements in Vedic Ritual</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>23</ab>
    </list>

<item><ab type=tocDivNum>II.</ab> <ref target=ch2>Post-Vedic Literature and the Origin of the Drama.</ref>
    <list type=tocList>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>1.</ab> <ref target=ch2.1>The Epics</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>28</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>2.</ab> <ref target=ch2.2>The Grammarians</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>31</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>3.</ab> <ref target=ch2.3>Religion and the Drama</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>36</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>4.</ab> <ref target=ch2.4>Theories of the Secular Origin of the Drama</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>49</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>5.</ab> <ref target=ch2.5>Greek Influence on the Sanskrit Drama</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>57</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>6.</ab> <ref target=ch2.6>The Çakas and the Sanskrit Drama</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>69</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>7.</ab> <ref target=ch2.7>The Evidence of the Pr&amacr;krits</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>72</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>8.</ab> <ref target=ch2.8>The Literary Antecedents of the Drama</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>75</ab>
    </list>
</list>


<p>PART II. <ref target=pt2>THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE SANSKRIT DRAMA</ref>

<list type=tocList>
<item><ab type=tocDivNum>III.</ab> <ref target=ch3>Açvagho&sdotb;a and the Buddhist Drama.</ref>
    <list type=tocList>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>1.</ab> <ref target=ch3.1>The Ç&amacr;riputraprakara&ndotb;a</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>80</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>2.</ab> <ref target=ch3.2>The Allegorical and the Hetaera Dramas</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>83</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>3.</ab> <ref target=ch3.3>The Language of the Dramas</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>85</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>4.</ab> <ref target=ch3.4>The Metres</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>89</ab>
    </list>

<item><ab type=tocDivNum>IV.</ab> <ref target=ch4>Bh&amacr;sa.</ref>
    <list type=tocList>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>1.</ab> <ref target=ch4.1>The Authenticity of Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s Dramas</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>91</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>2.</ab> <ref target=ch4.2>The Date of Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s Dramas</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>93</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>3.</ab> <ref target=ch4.3>The Dramas and their Sources</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>95</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>4.</ab> <ref target=ch4.4>Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s Art and Technique</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>105</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>5.</ab> <ref target=ch4.5>Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s Style</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>114</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>6.</ab> <ref target=ch4.6>The Language of the Plays</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>120</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>7.</ab> <ref target=ch4.7>The Metres of the Dramas</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>123</ab>
    </list>

<pb n=8 id=pb8 facs="f:008"><item><ab type=tocDivNum>V.</ab> <ref target=ch5>The Precursors of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa and Ç&umacr;draka.</ref>
    <list type=tocList>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>1.</ab> <ref target=ch5.1>The Precursors of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>127</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>2.</ab> <ref target=ch5.2>The Authorship and Age of the M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>128</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>3.</ab> <ref target=ch5.3>The M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>131</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>4.</ab> <ref target=ch5.4>The Pr&amacr;krits</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>140</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>5.</ab> <ref target=ch5.5>The Metres</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>142</ab>
    </list>

<item><ab type=tocDivNum>VI.</ab> <ref target=ch6>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa.</ref>
    <list type=tocList>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>1.</ab> <ref target=ch6.1>The Date of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>143</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>2.</ab> <ref target=ch6.2>The Three Dramas of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>147</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>3.</ab> <ref target=ch6.3>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s Dramatic Art</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>155</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>4.</ab> <ref target=ch6.4>The Style</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>160</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>5.</ab> <ref target=ch6.5>The Language and the Metres</ref>         <ab type=tocPageNum>166</ab>
    </list>

<item><ab type=tocDivNum>VII.</ab> <ref target=ch7>Candra, Har&sdotb;a, and Mahendravikramavarman.</ref>
    <list type=tocList>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>1.</ab> <ref target=ch7.1>Candra or Candraka</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>168</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>2.</ab> <ref target=ch7.2>The Authorship of the Dramas ascribed to Har&sdotb;a</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>170</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>3.</ab> <ref target=ch7.3>The Three Dramas</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>171</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>4.</ab> <ref target=ch7.4>Har&sdotb;a&apos;s Art and Style</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>175</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>5.</ab> <ref target=ch7.5>The Language and the Metres of Har&sdotb;a&apos;s Dramas</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>181</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>6.</ab> <ref target=ch7.6>Mahendravikramavarman</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>182</ab>
    </list>

<item><ab type=tocDivNum>VIII.</ab> <ref target=ch8>Bhavabh&umacr;ti.</ref>
    <list type=tocList>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>1.</ab> <ref target=ch8.1>The Date of Bhavabh&umacr;ti</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>186</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>2.</ab> <ref target=ch8.2>The Three Plays</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>187</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>3.</ab> <ref target=ch8.3>Bhavabh&umacr;ti&apos;s Dramatic Art and Style</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>192</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>4.</ab> <ref target=ch8.4>The Language and the Metres</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>203</ab>
    </list>

<item><ab type=tocDivNum>IX.</ab> <ref target=ch9>Viç&amacr;khadatta and Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a.</ref>
    <list type=tocList>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>1.</ab> <ref target=ch9.1>The Date of Viç&amacr;khadatta</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>204</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>2.</ab> <ref target=ch9.2>The Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>205</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>3.</ab> <ref target=ch9.3>The Language and the Metres of the Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>211</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>4.</ab> <ref target=ch9.4>The Date of Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>212</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>5.</ab> <ref target=ch9.5>The Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>212</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>6.</ab> <ref target=ch9.6>The Language and the Metres of the Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>219</ab>
    </list>

<item><ab type=tocDivNum>X.</ab> <ref target=ch10>Mur&amacr;ri, R&amacr;jaçekhara, their Predecessors and Successors.</ref>
    <list type=tocList>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>1.</ab> <ref target=ch10.1>The Predecessors of Mur&amacr;ri</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>220</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>2.</ab> <ref target=ch10.2>Mur&amacr;ri</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>225</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>3.</ab> <ref target=ch10.3>The Anarghar&amacr;ghava</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>226</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>4.</ab> <ref target=ch10.4>The Date of R&amacr;jaçekhara</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>231</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>5.</ab> <ref target=ch10.5>The Dramas of R&amacr;jaçekhara</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>232</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>6.</ab> <ref target=ch10.6>Bh&imacr;ma&tdotb;a and K&sdotb;em&imacr;çvara</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>239</ab>
    </list>

<pb n=9 id=pb9 facs="f:009"><item><ab type=tocDivNum>XI.</ab> <ref target=ch11>The Decline of the Sanskrit Drama.</ref>
    <list type=tocList>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>1.</ab> <ref target=ch11.1>The Decadence of the Drama</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>242</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>2.</ab> <ref target=ch11.2>The N&amacr;&tdotb;aka</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>244</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>3.</ab> <ref target=ch11.3>The Allegorical N&amacr;&tdotb;aka</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>251</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>4.</ab> <ref target=ch11.4>The N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr; and the Sa&tdotb;&tdotb;aka</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>256</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>5.</ab> <ref target=ch11.5>The Prakara&ndotb;a</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>257</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>6.</ab> <ref target=ch11.6>The Prahasana and the Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>260</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>7.</ab> <ref target=ch11.7>Minor Dramatic Types</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>264</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>8.</ab> <ref target=ch11.8>The Shadow Play</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>269</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>9.</ab> <ref target=ch11.9>Dramas of Irregular Type</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>270</ab>
    </list>

<item><ab type=tocDivNum>XII.</ab> <ref target=ch12>The Characteristics and Achievement of the Sanskrit Drama</ref>         <ab type=tocPageNum>276</ab>
</list>


<p>PART III. <ref target=pt3>DRAMATIC THEORY</ref>

<list type=tocList>
<item><ab type=tocDivNum>XIII.</ab> <ref target=ch13>The Theory of the Dramatic Art.</ref>
    <list type=tocList>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>1.</ab> <ref target=ch13.1>The Treatises on Dramatic Art</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>290</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>2.</ab> <ref target=ch13.2>The Nature and the Types of the Drama</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>295</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>3.</ab> <ref target=ch13.3>The Subject Matter and the Plot</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>296</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>4.</ab> <ref target=ch13.4>The Characters</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>305</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>5.</ab> <ref target=ch13.5>The Sentiments</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>314</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>6.</ab> <ref target=ch13.6>The Dramatic Styles and Languages</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>326</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>7.</ab> <ref target=ch13.7>The Dance, Song, and Music</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>338</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>8.</ab> <ref target=ch13.8>The Preliminaries and the Prologue</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>339</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>9.</ab> <ref target=ch13.9>The Types of Drama</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>345</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>10.</ab> <ref target=ch13.10>The Influence of Theory on Practice</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>352</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>11.</ab> <ref target=ch13.11>Aristotle and the Indian Theory of Poetics</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>355</ab>
    </list>
</list>


<p>PART IV. <ref target=pt4>DRAMATIC PRACTICE</ref>

<list type=tocList>
<item><ab type=tocDivNum>XIV.</ab> <ref target=ch14>The Indian Theatre.</ref>
    <list type=tocList>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>1.</ab> <ref target=ch14.1>The Theatre</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>358</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>2.</ab> <ref target=ch14.2>The Actors</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>360</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>3.</ab> <ref target=ch14.3>The Mise-en-scène and Representation of the Drama</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>364</ab>
    <item><ab type=tocDivNum>4.</ab> <ref target=ch14.4>The Audience</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>369</ab>
    </list>
</list>

<p><ref target=ix.en>English Index</ref>         <ab type=tocPageNum>373</ab>

<p><ref target=ix.sa>Sanskrit Index</ref>         <ab type=tocPageNum>394</ab>






<pb n=10 id=pb10 facs="f:010">
<div1 id=abbr type=Abbreviations>
<head>ABBREVIATIONS</head>

<p>

<table>
<row><cell>AID.       <cell><foreign lang=de>Über die Anfänge des indischen Dramas</foreign>, Munich, 1914.
<row><cell>AJP.       <cell>American Journal of Philology.
<row><cell>AP.        <cell>Agni Pur&amacr;&ndotb;a, ed. BI.
<row><cell>BI.        <cell>Bibliotheca Indica, Calcutta.
<row><cell>BS.        <cell>Bh&amacr;sa-Studien, Leipzig, 1918.
<row><cell>BSS.       <cell>Bombay Sanskrit Series.
<row><cell>CHI.       <cell>Cambridge History of India.
<row><cell>DR.        <cell>Daçar&umacr;pa, cited from Hall&apos;s ed. BI.
<row><cell>EI.        <cell lang=la>Epigraphia Indica.
<row><cell>GGA.       <cell lang=de>Göttingische gelehrte Anzeigen.
<row><cell>GIL.       <cell lang=de>Geschichte der indischen Litteratur, by M. Winternitz, Leipzig, 1904&ndash;22.
<row><cell>GN.        <cell lang=de>Nachrichten der königl. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen.
<row><cell>GOS.       <cell>Gaekwad&apos;s Oriental Series.
<row><cell>GSAI.      <cell lang=it>Giornale della Società Asiatica Italiana.
<row><cell>HOS.       <cell>Harvard Oriental Series.
<row><cell>IA.        <cell>Indian Antiquary.
<row><cell>ID.        <cell lang=de>Das indische Drama, Berlin, 1920.
<row><cell>IS.        <cell lang=de>Indische Studien.
<row><cell>JA.        <cell lang=fr>Journal Asiatique.
<row><cell>JAOS.      <cell>Journal of the American Oriental Society.
<row><cell>JBRAS.     <cell>Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society.
<row><cell>JPASB.     <cell>Journal and Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal.
<row><cell>JRAS.      <cell>Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society.
<row><cell>KF.        <cell lang=de>Aufsätze zur Kultur- und Sprachgeschichte Ernst Kuhn gewidmet. Breslau, 1916.
<row><cell>KM.        <cell>K&amacr;vyam&amacr;l&amacr; series, Bombay.
<row><cell>N.         <cell>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra.
<row><cell>R.         <cell>Ras&amacr;r&ndotb;avasudh&amacr;kara, ed. TSS. 1916.
<row><cell>SBAW.      <cell lang=de>Sitzungsberichte der königl. Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin.
<row><cell>SD.        <cell>S&amacr;hityadarpa&ndotb;a, cited by the sections of the BI. ed.
<row><cell>SP.        <cell>Studies in the History of Sanskrit Poetics, I, London, 1923.
<row><cell>TI.        <cell lang=fr>Le théâtre indien, Paris, 1890.
<row><cell>TSS.       <cell>Trivandrum Sanskrit Series.
<row><cell>VOJ.       <cell>Vienna Oriental Journal.
<row><cell>ZDMG.      <cell lang=de>Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft.
</table>





<pb n=11 id=pb11 facs="f:011">
</front>
<body>
<div0 id=pt1 n=I type=Part>
<head type=label>PART I</head>

<head>THE ORIGIN OF THE SANSKRIT DRAMA</head>


<pb n=12 id=pb12 facs="f:012">
<div1 id=ch1 n=I type=Chapter>
<head type=label>I</head>

<head>DRAMATIC ELEMENTS IN VEDIC LITERATURE</head>


<div2 id=ch1.1 n=1 type=Section>
<head><ab type=divNum>1.</ab> <hi>The Indian Tradition of the Origin of the Drama</hi></head>

<p>Indian tradition, preserved in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>,<note n=1 id=n12.1>i. 2 ff.</note> the oldest of the texts of the theory of the drama, claims for the drama divine origin, and a close connexion with the sacred Vedas themselves. The golden age had no need for such amusements: ignorant of all pain, the sorrow, which is as essential to the art as joy itself, was inconceivable. The creation of the new form of literature was reserved to the silver age, when the gods approached the all-father and bade him produce something to give pleasure to the ears and eyes alike, a fifth Veda which, unlike the other four, would not be the jealous preserve of the three twice-born castes, but might be shared by the Ç&umacr;dras also. Brahm&amacr; gave ear to the pleading, and designed to fashion a Veda in which tradition (<hi lang=sa-Latn>itih&amacr;sa</hi>) should be combined with instruction in all the ends of men. To accomplish his task he took from the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi> the element of recitation, from the <hi>S&amacr;maveda</hi> song, from the <hi>Yajurveda</hi> the mimetic art, and from the <hi>Atharvaveda</hi> sentiment. Then he bade Viçvakarman, the divine architect, build a playhouse in which the sage Bharata was instructed to carry into practice the art thus created. The gods accepted with joy the new creation; Çiva contributed to it the T&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;ava dance, expressing violent emotion, P&amacr;rvat&imacr;, his spouse, the tender and voluptuous L&amacr;sya, while Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u was responsible for the invention of the four dramatic styles, essential to the effect of any play. To Bharata fell the duty of transferring to earth this celestial Veda in the inferior and truncated form of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>.

<p>The legend is interesting for its determination to secure the <pb n=13 id=pb13 facs="f:013">participation of every member of the Hindu Trinity in the creation of the new art, and for its effort to claim that the fifth Veda of tradition was the Veda of the dramatic art. The older tradition, recorded and exploited by the epic,<note n=1 id=n13.1>Hopkins, <hi>Great Epic of India</hi>, pp. 7, 10, 53.</note> recognizes as the fifth Veda the mass of traditions, and the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> tacitly concedes this by representing the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaveda</hi> as including these traditions. The legend, therefore, is not of great antiquity, nor need we place it long before the compilation of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> itself. The date of that text is uncertain, but we cannot with any assurance place it before the third century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> With the Indian tendency to find divine origins, it may well be that the tradition existed much earlier, but in the absence of any corroboration that must remain a mere hypothesis, for which no conclusive ground can be adduced. What is important is that none of the theorists on the drama appeal to any Vedic texts as representing dramas, whence it is natural to draw the conclusion that there was no Indian tradition extant in their time which pointed to the preservation among the sacred texts of dramas. Indeed, if it were worth while, the conclusion might legitimately be drawn that the absence of any drama in the Vedic literature was recognized, since it was necessary for the gods to ask Brahm&amacr; to create a completely new type of literature, suitable for an age posterior to that in which the Vedas already existed.



<div2 id=ch1.2 n=2>
<head><ab type=divNum>2.</ab> <hi>The Dialogues of the Veda</hi></head>

<p>The silence of Indian tradition is all the more remarkable because there do exist in the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi> itself a number of hymns which are obviously dialogues, and which are expressly recognized as such by early Indian tradition.<note n=2 id=n13.2>Keith, JRAS. 1911, pp. 981 ff.</note> The number of such hymns is uncertain, for it is possible to add to those which clearly bear that character others whose interpretation might be improved by assuming a division of persons. There are, however, at least fifteen whose character as dialogues is quite undeniable, and most of these hymns are of marked interest. Thus in x. 10 Yama and Yam&imacr;, the primeval twins, whence in the legend are derived the races of men, engage in debate; <pb n=14 id=pb14 facs="f:014">the poet, with a more refined sentiment than the legend, is uneasy regarding this primitive incest, and represents Yam&imacr; as intent on an effort, fruitless so far as the hymn goes, to induce Yama to accept and make fruitful her proffered love. A tantalizing, but certainly interesting, hymn in the same book (x. 95) gives a dialogue between Pur&umacr;ravas, and the nymph Urvaç&imacr;; he rebukes her inconstancy, but does not succeed in making her refrain from withdrawing from his gaze. In viii. 100 Nema Bh&amacr;rgava utters an appeal to Indra, to which the god is pleased to give a reply. Sometimes there are three interlocutors; thus Agastya, the sage, has a conversation (i. 179) of an enigmatic type with his wife, Lop&amacr;mudr&amacr;, and their son; not less obscure is the dialogue between Indra and Vasukra, in which the wife of the latter plays a small part, in x. 28; and in iv. 18 we have a most confused dialogue between Indra, Aditi, and V&amacr;madeva. Even less intelligible is the famous debate between Indra, his wife, Indr&amacr;&ndotb;&imacr;, and V&rdotb;&sdotb;&amacr;kapi (x. 86), each interpreter of which is able to show the absurdity of the versions of his predecessors but seems incapable of recognizing the defects of his own. Or one of the interlocutors may be a troop, not an individual. Thus Saram&amacr;, the messenger of Indra, seeking the kine which have been taken away, goes to the demons, the Pa&ndotb;is, and holds with them lively debate (x. 108). The gods also have a hard business (x. 51&ndash;3) to persuade Agni, the living fire, to persevere in the tedious occupation of bearing to them the oblations of mortals, and the dialogue in which they engage is vivid in the extreme, extending even to the breaking of a stanza into portions for two interlocutors. Two dialogues are of interest for their historical allusions, the converse of Viçv&amacr;mitra and the rivers (iii. 33) which he seeks to cross, and that of Vasi&sdotb;&tdotb;ha with his sons (vii. 33), if indeed that is the correct interpretation of the speakers of the hymn. Indra again disputes with the Maruts (i. 165 and 170), who had disgraced themselves in his eyes by deserting him in the thick of his contest with the demon V&rdotb;tra, but who succeed at last in placating his anger; in the former hymn Agastya seems also to intervene, by summing up the result at the close, and invoking the favour of the gods for himself. Similarly the account of Viçv&amacr;mitra&apos;s dialogue ends with the assertion that <pb n=15 id=pb15 facs="f:015">the Bharatas successfully crossed the rivers in search of booty, having won a passage by the intercession of their priest. The interesting, but obscure, hymn (iv. 42), in which Indra and Varu&ndotb;a seem to engage in a dispute as to their relative pre-eminence, is clearly commented on by the poet himself, and his intervention may be suspected even where it is not essential.

<p>Now it is clear that the tradition of the ritual literature did not know what to make of the dialogues of the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi>. The genre of composition was one which died out in the later Vedic age; it is significant that the <hi>Atharvaveda</hi> knows but one hymn of that type (v. 11) in which the priest, Atharvan, begs the god for the payment due, a cow; the god is little inclined to accord his prayer, but finally is induced to relent and to add to the guerdon due the promise of eternal friendship. It is not in the least surprising, therefore, if we find that Y&amacr;ska and Çaunaka in the fifth century <hi rend=asc>B.C.</hi> were at variance as to whether the hymn x. 95 was a dialogue, as the former held, or a mere legend, as the latter believed.<note n=1 id=n15.1>Sieg, <hi lang=de>Die Sagenstoffe des &Rdotb;gveda</hi>, p. 27.</note> In the commentary of S&amacr;ya&ndotb;a we find that the tradition was unable to ascribe any ritual use for nearly all the hymns; the case of x. 86 is an exception, but it is significant that that hymn has little of a true dialogue, the three speakers rather uttering enigmas than conversing, and it was therefore easier to fit it into the inconspicuous part it occupies in the later ritual. We must, therefore, admit that we have in these dialogues the remnant of a style of poetry which died out in the later Vedic period.

<p>Its original purpose is obscure, but a very interesting suggestion was made in 1869 by Max Müller in connexion with his version of <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi> i. 165.<note n=2 id=n15.2>SBE. xxxii. 182 f.</note> He conjectured that the &lsquo;dialogue was repeated at sacrifices in honour of the Maruts or that possibly it was acted by two parties, one representing Indra, the other the Maruts and their followers&rsquo;. In 1890 the suggestion was repeated with approval by Professor Lévi,<note n=3 id=n15.3>TI. i. 307 f.</note> who added to it the argument that the <hi>S&amacr;maveda</hi> shows that the art of music had been fully developed by the Vedic age. Moreover the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi><note n=4 id=n15.4>i. 92. 4.</note> already knows maidens who, decked in splendid raiment, dance and attract lovers, and the <hi>Atharvaveda</hi><note n=5 id=n15.5>xii. 1. 41.</note> tells <pb n=16 id=pb16 facs="f:016">how men dance and sing to music. There is, therefore, <hi lang=la>a priori</hi> no fatal objection to assuming that the period of the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi> knew dramatic spectacles, religious in character, in which the priests assumed the rôles of gods and sages in order to imitate on earth the events of the heavens.

<p>The logical consequence of this doctrine is seen in Professor von Schroeder&apos;s elaborate theory<note n=1 id=n16.1><hi lang=de>Mysterium und Mimus im Rigveda</hi> (1908); VOJ. xxii. 223 ff.; xxiii. 1 ff., 270 f.</note> that the dialogue hymns, and also certain monologues, for instance x. 119, in which Indra appears as glorifying himself in the intoxication of his favourite Soma drink, are relics of Vedic mysteries, an inheritance in germ from Indo-European times. Ethnology shows us the close relation of music, dance, and drama among many peoples, and the curious phenomenon that Vedic religion knows of gods as dancers cannot be explained satisfactorily save on the assumption that the priests were used to see performed ritual dances, in themselves imitations of the cosmic dance in which the world was, on one view, created. Such dances partake of the nature of sympathetic magic, and they have an obvious parallel in the great sacrificial rites, which in the Br&amacr;hma&ndotb;a period are undertaken in order to represent on earth the cosmic creation. It is true that we do not find in the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi> the phallic dances which in Greece and Mexico alike are held to be closely connected with the origin of drama, but that was because the priests of the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi> were in many respects austere, and disapproved of phallic deities of any kind. The dramas of the ritual, therefore, are in a sense somewhat out of the main line of the development of the drama; the popular side has survived through the ages in a rough way in the Y&amacr;tr&amacr;s well known in the literature of Bengal, while the refined and sacerdotalized Vedic drama passed away without a direct descendant.

<p>Independent support for the view of the dialogues as mystery plays <hi lang=la>in nuce</hi> is given by Dr. Hertel,<note n=2 id=n16.2>VOJ. xviii. 59 ff., 137 ff.; xxiii. 273 ff.; xxiv. 117 ff. Cf. Charpentier, VOJ. xxiii. 33 ff.; <hi>Die Supar&ndotb;asage</hi> (1922) is somewhat confused and uncritical.</note> whose argument is largely based on the doctrine that the Vedic hymns were always sung, and that in singing it would have been impossible for a single singer to make the necessary distinction between the different speakers, which would have been possible if the hymns had not <pb n=17 id=pb17 facs="f:017">been sung. The hymns, therefore, represent the beginnings of a dramatic art, which may be compared with the form of the <hi>G&imacr;tagovinda</hi>.<note n=1 id=n17.1>See ch. xi., § 9; Winternitz, GIL. iii. 130 f.</note> But, what is more important, he seeks to find an actual drama on an extended scale in the <hi>Supar&ndotb;&amacr;dhy&amacr;ya</hi>,<note n=2 id=n17.2>See also Jarl Charpentier, <hi lang=de>Die Supar&ndotb;asage</hi> (Uppsala, 1922).</note> a curious and comparatively late Vedic text. In his view, accordingly, the Vedic drama does not stand isolated; it is seen in the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi> only in its beginnings; the <hi>Supar&ndotb;&amacr;dhy&amacr;ya</hi> displays it en route to further development, and in the Y&amacr;tr&amacr;s we can see a continuation of the old type, which aids us in following the growth from the Vedic drama of the classical drama of India. In this regard there is a distinct divergence of view between the two supporters of the dramatic theory, for Professor von Schroeder regards the Y&amacr;tr&amacr;s as genuinely connected with the later drama, being developed in close connexion with the cult of Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u-K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a and Rudra-Çiva, but as representing a different development from the same root as the Vedic dialogues. Of this other side of the drama he finds hints in the traditional connexion of the Gandharvas and Apsarases with the drama, for these in his view are essentially phallic deities.

<p>There is, of course, no doubt of the possibility of the dialogues really representing portions of the old ritual in which the priests assumed the character of gods or demons, for there are abundant parallels for such a supposition. But there is no sufficient ground to compel us to seek for such an explanation of these hymns; that the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi> contains nothing save what is connected with ritual is a postulate which is not made by the Indians themselves, and has no justification save in the desire for symmetry. On the contrary, it is perfectly legitimate and much more natural to regard the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi> as a collection of hymns, in the vast majority of cases of ritual origin, but including some more secular poetry, to which genus alone can we reasonably attribute the battle hymns of Viçv&amacr;mitra and Vasi&sdotb;&tdotb;ha. The fact that such hymns disappear in the later Vedic literature is then natural, for that literature represents unquestionably hymns collected definitely for ritual uses, and therefore nothing was admitted which could not be employed therein. To assume, therefore, that a ritual explanation must <pb n=18 id=pb18 facs="f:018">be found, and to find it in ritual drama is illegitimate, and the only justification for accepting the view in any case must lie in the fact that it affords a better explanation of the hymn than any which can be given otherwise.

<p>It is impossible to feel any certainty that the necessary proof has been brought in any case. The hymn ix. 112, which describes in four stanzas in a rather humorous style the various ends of men, ending with the refrain in each case, &lsquo;O Soma, flow for Indra&rsquo;, is transformed into the marching song of a popular festival at which mummers represent vegetation deities and symbols of fertility are carried. The tradition knows nothing of these happenings, and the hymn certainly suggests none to the average intelligence. On the contrary, it seems a very natural piece of witty sarcasm, to which point is lent by the use of the refrain, and to deny the possibility of sarcasm to the thinkers who produce the advanced and sceptical views expressed in the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi> is certainly unwise.<note n=1 id=n18.1>This is quite consistent with the ritual use in a Soma &lsquo;wish&rsquo; offering suggested by Oldenberg, GGA. 1909, pp. 79 ff. Cf. his remarks on vii. 103 in <hi lang=de>&Rdotb;gveda-Noten</hi>, ii. 67.</note> To explain the V&rdotb;&sdotb;&amacr;kapi hymn (x. 86) as a piece of fertility magic in dramatic form is ingenious, but unluckily it in no way contributes towards the explanation of the hymn, and, therefore, is as valueless as the other possible explanations which have been offered. The same condemnation must be passed on the effort to find a mimic race at a festival described in the strange Mudgala hymn (x. 102) which if it is intelligible at all, seems to have a mythological reference, and not to refer either to actual or mimic races.

<p>An ingenious effort is that made to adduce ethnological parallels to prove that the hymn x. 119, which is a straightforward monologue, placed in the mouth of Indra, celebrating the effect of drinking the Soma, must be regarded as part of a ritual in which at the close of the drinking of the Soma in the rite, a priest comes forward, assuming the rôle of Indra, and celebrates in monologue the strength of the juice of the holy plant<corr>.</corr> Among the Cora Indians, after a wine festival, a god is introduced showing the effects of the drink, while a singer celebrates its potent merits. There is, however, a fatal hiatus in the proof; the poem by itself is perfectly clear, and to seek <pb n=19 id=pb19 facs="f:019">for an explanation so far-fetched is idle expenditure of energy. The same condemnation must be expressed of the effort to find in the frog hymn (vii. 103) a song sung by men masked as frogs, dancing as a spell to secure rain. If we grant that the hymn is really intended as a rain spell, which is moderately probable though not proved, it needs no further explanation whatever, and, if we do not accept this suggestion but adopt the older view that it satyrizes in an amusing way the antics of certain performers of the ritual, the character of the hymn as a fertility spell vanishes at once. The errors of method are seen excellently in the fantastic conclusion that the gambler&apos;s hymn (x. 34), in which a gambler deplores the fatal love for the dice which has led to his reducing even his beloved wife to ruin, is a dramatic monologue in which dancers represent the leaping and falling dice. The dialogue of Yama and Yam&imacr; reduces itself to a fertility drama, from which the prudishness of the Vedic age has omitted the vital part of the union of the pair. The curious hymn, iv. 18, which tells of Indra&apos;s unnatural birth becomes a drama by the assumption that of thirteen verses seven are ascribed to the poet himself. We are in fact in every case presented with a bare possibility, which sometimes involves absurdities, and in all cases does nothing whatever to help us in interpreting the hymns. There is nothing, it is true, inconceivable in the view that the hymn of Saram&amacr; and the Pa&ndotb;is was actually recited by two different parties, and thus was a ritual drama <hi lang=la>in nuce</hi>; what is certain is that the later Vedic period knew nothing whatever of such a practice; the only hymn in dialogue form for which it finds a use (x. 86) is assigned an employment in which there is nothing dramatic whatever. The absurdity of the whole process reaches perhaps its fullest exhibition in the dissertation on the hymn regarding Agastya and Lop&amacr;mudr&amacr; (i. 179), for it becomes a fertility rite performed after the corn has been cut; Lop&amacr;mudr&amacr; becomes &lsquo;that which has the seal of disappearance upon it&rsquo;, a feat which is impossible in the Vedic language; the hymn itself suits far better the obvious alternative<note n=1 id=n19.1>Oldenberg, GGA. 1909, p. 77, n. 4.</note> of &lsquo;one who enjoys love at the cost of breaking her marital vows&rsquo;. To explain the hymns of Indra and the Maruts (i. 170, 171, and 165) we are to hold that we <pb n=20 id=pb20 facs="f:020">have three scenes of a dramatic performance, which takes place at a Soma sacrifice to celebrate the victory of Indra over the serpent V&rdotb;tra, ending with a dance of the Maruts, represented by youths fully armed. This weapon dance is a relic of old vegetation ritual, the driving out of the old year, winter, or death, which is the foundation of the dances of the Roman Salii, the Greek Kouretes, the Phrygian Korybantes, and the German sword dancers. How can it be justifiable to spin theories thus in order to explain hymns which are taken by themselves without serious difficulty save in detail?

<p>It is equally impossible to find any cogency in Dr. Hertel&apos;s arguments from the necessity of assuming two sets of performers, since the hymns were sung and a single voice in singing could not distinguish the interlocutors. Doubtless, if we accepted this necessity, we would be inclined to admit <hi lang=la>a priori</hi> that the song would tend to be accompanied by action and by the dance, so that drama would be on the way to development. But we do not know that the hymns of the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi> were always sung; on the contrary we do know with absolute certainty that, while the verses of the <hi>S&amacr;maveda</hi> were sung (<hi lang=sa-Latn>gai</hi>), the verses of the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi> were recited (<hi>ça&ndota;s</hi>). True, we do not have precise information of the exact character of the recitation, but there is not the slightest ground to suppose that a reciter could not have conveyed by differences in his mode of recitation the distinction between two different interlocutors, and the fact that this point is ignored in the argument is fatal to it. Moreover, we must admit that we are wholly ignorant as to the degree in which it was desired by the authors or reciters of these hymns to convey these differences of person. We do not know, and the ritual text-books did not know, exactly in what way these hymns were used. We find in the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi> a number of philosophic hymns; why should we not admit that a philosophic dialogue such as that of Yama and Yam&imacr; is possible without demanding that it should be a fragment of ritual? We have historical hymns in Ma&ndotb;&ddotb;ala vii; why should we turn the dialogue of Viçv&amacr;mitra and the rivers into a drama? Why should we insist that all hymns were composed for ritual use, when we know that ancient tales were among the things used to pass the period immediately following the disposal of the dead, and <pb n=21 id=pb21 facs="f:021">that during the pauses in the great horse sacrifice, performed to assert the wide sovereignty of the king, both Brahmins and warriors sang songs to fill up the time? We may legitimately assume that in the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi> we have hymns of other than directly ritual or magic purpose; the gambler&apos;s hymn cannot by any reasonable stretch of the imagination be taken as ritual.<note n=1 id=n21.1>Keith, JRAS. 1911, p. 1006.</note>

<p>It is also impossible to accept the view that the Vedic drama died out under the chilling effect of the disapproval of the priests of fertility ritual. We find, on the contrary, that fertility ritual is fully recognized later in the Mah&amacr;vrata ceremonial, and also in the horse sacrifice, which are both known to the other Vedic Sa&mdota;hit&amacr;s, though this feature of the rite is not referred to, directly at least, in the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi>. Moreover, even if the disapproval of fertility rites had been real, why should it have brought to a close the drama? The dialogues of Agni and the gods, of Saram&amacr; and the Pa&ndotb;is, of Varu&ndotb;a and Indra, of Indra and the singer&mdash;and perhaps V&amacr;yu also (viii. 100), have no connexion with fertility, and this aspect of drama need not have perished. Dr. Hertel is certainly right in demanding traces of development, not of decadence, but his great effort to find a full drama in the <hi>Supar&ndotb;&amacr;dhy&amacr;ya</hi> must definitely be pronounced a failure. It involves an elaborate invention of stage directions, the preparation of a list of <hi lang=la>dramatis personae</hi> largely on the basis of imagination, and a translation of the piece based on this theory, which can be shown in detail to be open to the certainty of error. Add to this the fact that there is no hint in Indian tradition that the <hi>Supar&ndotb;&amacr;dhy&amacr;ya</hi>, on the face of it a late imitation of Vedic work proper, had ever any dramatic intention or use.

<p>A very different theory of the purpose of these hymns is that which we owe to Professors Windisch,<note n=2 id=n21.2>Cf. <hi>Sansk. Phil</hi>. pp. 404 ff.</note> Oldenberg,<note n=3 id=n21.3>ZDMG. xxxvii. 54 ff.; xxxix. 52 ff.; GGA. 1909, pp. 66 ff.; GN. 1911, pp. 441 ff.; <hi lang=de>Zur Geschichte der altindischen Prosa</hi> (1917), pp. 53 ff.; <hi lang=de>Das Mahabharata</hi>, pp. 21 ff.</note> and Pischel.<note n=4 id=n21.4>VS. ii. 42 ff. GGA. 1891, pp. 351 ff.</note> They represent an old type, Indo-European in antiquity, of composition of epic character, in which the verses, representing the points of highest emotion, were preserved, and the connecting links were in prose which was not stereotyped, and therefore <pb n=22 id=pb22 facs="f:022">has not come down to us. The theory is capable of combination with the suggestion that these hymns in dialogue were dramatic; thus Prof. Pischel explained the combination of prose and verse in the Sanskrit drama as a relic of this early form of literature, which thus might serve both epic and dramatic ends.<note n=1 id=n22.1>Compare Oldenberg, <hi lang=de>Die Literatur des alten Indien</hi>, p. 241.</note> Despite the considerable vogue which the theory has at one time or other attained, and the energetic defence of it by Professor Oldenberg, who has based upon it an elaborate theory of the development of Indian prose, it is doubtful whether we can accept the view.<note n=2 id=n22.2>See Keith, JRAS. 1911, pp. 981 ff.; 1912, pp. 429 ff.; <hi>Rigveda Br&amacr;hma&ndotb;as</hi>, pp. 68 ff.</note> It is a very real difficulty here also that the tradition shows no trace of knowledge of this characteristic of the hymns, and we do not find any work actually in this form in the whole of the Vedic literature. The alleged instances of this type, such as those of the tale of Çuna&hdotb;çepa in the <hi>Aitareya Br&amacr;hma&ndotb;a</hi>, or the working up in the <hi>Çatapatha Br&amacr;hma&ndotb;a</hi> of the legend of Pur&umacr;ravas and Urvaç&imacr; cannot possibly be made to fit the theory. In the latter case we have a tale, which manifestly does not agree with the verses of the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi>, and which is openly and obviously an attempt to work that hymn into the explanation of the ritual; in the former we have the use of gnomic verses to illustrate a theme, a form of literature which is preserved through the history of Sanskrit prose, and portions of a verse narrative. The true type, verses used at the point of emotion, especially, therefore, to give the vital speeches and replies, is thus not represented by any text of the Vedic literature. Whether it ever existed at all in the sense postulated by the theory, whether there are traces of it in the <corr sic=Pali>P&amacr;li</corr> J&amacr;takas, or whether its existence even there is a misunderstanding, are questions which are not in vital connexion with the origin of Sanskrit drama, and may, therefore, here be left undiscussed. One consideration, however, is germane; if it were necessary to explain the Vedic dialogues by this theory, it would certainly be possible to do so far more effectively and simply than by the theory of their being the remains of ritual dramas. The most serious objection to both theories is that they are not really necessary. Professor Geldner<note n=3 id=n22.3><hi lang=de>Die indische Balladendichtung</hi> (1913). Cf. G. M. Miller, <hi>The Popular Ballad</hi> (1905)<corr>.</corr></note> who formerly patronized <pb n=23 id=pb23 facs="f:023">the theory of Oldenberg has sought to explain the hymns in question as ballads.<note n=1 id=n23.1>The existence of this type in the Epic is certainly most improbable, and in the J&amacr;takas it is not frequent; cf. Charpentier, <hi lang=de>Die Supar&ndotb;asage</hi>, and Winternitz&apos;s admissions, GIL. ii. 368 with Oldenberg, GN. 1918, pp. 429 ff.; 1919, pp. 61 ff.</note>

<p>Nor of course is it necessary to make any use of this theory in order to explain the mixture of prose and verse in the Sanskrit drama. The use of prose needs no defence or explanation; that of verse is what was essentially to be expected, in view of the importance of song as a form of amusement as well as in worship both in Vedic times and later, and of the fact that our extant dramas draw so largely on epic tradition, preserved in versified texts. Nothing indeed is more noteworthy in Sanskrit literature than the determination to turn everything, law, astronomy, architecture, rhetoric, even philosophy into a metrical form. The theorists on the drama give no suggestion that the prose was regarded as any less fixed in character than the verses, or that it was not the duty of the author of the drama to be as careful in preparing the one as the other, and the manuscript tradition of the drama does not hint at any distinction of the two elements as regards source.


<div2 id=ch1.3 n=3>
<head><ab type=divNum>3.</ab> <hi>Dramatic Elements in Vedic Ritual</hi></head>

<p>When we leave out of account the enigmatic dialogues of the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi> we can see that the Vedic ritual contained within itself the germs of drama, as is the case with practically every primitive form of worship. The ritual did not consist merely of the singing of songs or recitations in honour of the gods; it involved a complex round of ceremonies in some of which there was undoubtedly present the element of dramatic representation; that is the performers of the rites assumed for the time being personalities other than their own. There is an interesting instance of this in the ritual of the Soma purchase for the Soma sacrifice. The seller is in some versions at the close of the ceremony deprived of his price, and beaten or pelted with clods. Now there can be no doubt that we have here, not a reflex of a disapproval of trafficking in Soma, but a mimic account of the obtaining of Soma from its guardians the Gandharvas, and there is some truth in the comparison drawn <pb n=24 id=pb24 facs="f:024">between the Ç&umacr;dra who plays the <corr sic=role>rôle</corr> of the mishandled seller and the much misused Devil of the mediaeval mystery plays.<note n=1 id=n24.1>Hillebrandt, <hi>Ved. Myth.</hi>, i. 69 ff.</note> But we must not exaggerate the amount of representation; it falls very far short of an approach to drama, a point which is overlooked by Professor von Schroeder throughout his discussions. A drama proper can only be said to come into being when the actors perform parts deliberately for the sake of the performance, to give pleasure to themselves and others, if not profit also; if a ritual includes elements of representation, the aim is not the representation, but the actors are seeking a direct religious or magic result. It would be absurd, for instance, to treat the identification in the marriage ritual of the husband and wife with the sky and the earth as in any sense dramatic or to see any drama in the performance of the royal consecration, which is based carefully on the divine consecration of Indra, doubtless in the view that thus the king was for the time being identified with the great god, and so acquired some measure of his prowess.

<p>In the Mah&amacr;vrata<note n=2 id=n24.2>Keith, <hi>&Sacute;&amacr;&ndota;kh&amacr;yana &Amacr;ra&ndotb;yaka</hi>, pp. 72 ff.</note> we find elements which are of importance as indicating the materials from which the drama might develop. The Mah&amacr;vrata is plainly a rite intended to strengthen at the winter solstice the sun, so that it may resume its vigour and make fruitful the earth. Now an essential part of the rite is a struggle between a Vaiçya, whose colour is to be white, and a Ç&umacr;dra, black in colour, over a round white skin, which ultimately falls to the victorious Vaiçya. It is impossible, without ignoring the obvious nature of this rite, not to see in it a mimic contest to gain the sun, the power of light, the Aryan, striving against that of darkness, the Ç&umacr;dra. In the face of the ethnological parallels it is impossible also to sever this episode from the numerous forms of the contest of summer and winter, the first represented by the white Aryan, the second by the dark Ç&umacr;dra. We have in fact a primitive dramatic ritual, and one which it may be added was popular throughout the Vedic age. The same ceremony is also marked by a curious episode; a Brahmin student and a hetaera are introduced as engaged in coarse abuse of each other, and in the older form of the ritual <pb n=25 id=pb25 facs="f:025">we actually find that sexual union as a fertility rite is permitted, though later taste dismissed the practice as undesirable. The ritual purpose of this abuse is undeniable; it is aimed at producing fertility, and has a precise parallel in the untranslatable language employed in the horse sacrifice during the period when the unlucky chief queen is compelled to lie beside the slaughtered horse, in order to secure, we may assume, the certainty of obtaining a son for the monarch whose conquests are thus celebrated.<note n=1 id=n25.1>Keith, HOS. XVIII. cxxxv.</note>

<p>There are, however, nothing but elements here, and we have reasonable certainty that no drama was known. In the <hi>Yajurveda</hi> we have long lists of persons of every kind covering every possible sort of occupation, and the term Na&tdotb;a, which is normally the designation of the actor in the later literature is unknown. We find but one term<note n=2 id=n25.2>VS. xxx. 4; TB. iii. 4. 2.</note> which later ever has that sense, Çail&umacr;&sdotb;a, and there is nothing whatever to show that an actor here is meant; a musician or a dancer may be denoted, for both dancing and singing are mentioned in close proximity.

<p>Professor Hillebrandt,<note n=3 id=n25.3>AID. pp. 22 f.</note> on the other hand, is satisfied that we have actual ritual drama before us, and Professor Konow<note n=4 id=n25.4>ID. pp. 42 ff.</note> insists that these are indeed ritual dramas, but that they are borrowed by the ritual from the popular mime of the time, which accordingly must have known dialogue, abusive conversation and blows, but of which the chief parts were dance, song, and music which are reckoned in the <hi>Kau&sdotb;&imacr;taki Br&amacr;hma&ndotb;a</hi><note n=5 id=n25.5>xxix. 5.</note> as the arts, but of which the <hi>P&amacr;raskara G&rdotb;hya S&umacr;tra</hi><note n=6 id=n25.6>ii. 7. 3.</note> disapproves for the use of men of the three higher castes. The evidence for this assumption is entirely lacking, and it is extremely significant that the Vedic texts ignore the Na&tdotb;a,<note n=7 id=n25.7>The Pr&amacr;kritic form of the term as opposed to Vedic <hi lang=sa-Latn>n&rdotb;tu</hi> and <hi lang=sa-Latn>n&rdotb;tta</hi> is legitimate evidence for the development of pantomimic dancing in circles more popular than priestly. But it does nothing to show that such dancing was originally secular, or that it rather than religious dancing gave a factor to drama.</note> whose activity belongs according to all the evidence to a later period. It is, of course, always possible to deprecate any argument from silence, though the value of this contention is diminished by the very remarkable enumerations of the different forms of occupation given in the Puru&sdotb;amedha sections of the <pb n=26 id=pb26 facs="f:026"><hi>Yajurveda</hi>, where in the imaginary sacrifice of men the imagination of the Brahmins appears to have laboured to enumerate every form of human activity. But in the absence of any proof that secular pantomime is older than religious throughout the world, and in the absence of anything to indicate that it was so in the case of India, it seems quite impossible to accept Professor Konow&apos;s suggested origin of drama.

<p>Of other elements which enter into drama we find the songs of the <hi>S&amacr;maveda</hi>, and the use of ceremonial dances. Thus at the Mah&amacr;vrata maidens dance round the fire as a spell to bring down rain for the crops, and to secure the prosperity of the herds. Before the marriage ceremony is completed<note n=1 id=n26.1><hi>Ç&amacr;&nmacr;kh&amacr;yana G&rdotb;hya S&umacr;tra</hi>, i. 11. 5.</note> there is a dance of matrons whose husbands are still alive, obviously to secure that the marriage shall endure and be fruitful. When a death takes place, and the ashes of the deceased are collected, to be laid away, the mourners move round the vase which contains the last relics of the dead, and dancers are present who dance to the sound of the lute and the flute; dance, music, and song fill the whole day of mourning.<note n=2 id=n26.2>Caland, <hi lang=de>Die altindischen Todten- und Bestattungsgebräuche</hi>, pp. 138 ff.</note> Dancing is closely associated throughout the history of the Indian theatre with the drama, and in the ritual of Çiva and Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u-K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a it has an important part. Hence the doctrine which has the approval of Professor Oldenberg<note n=3 id=n26.3><hi lang=de>Die Literatur des alten Indien</hi>, p. 237; Macdonell, <hi>Sanskrit Literature</hi>, p. 347.</note> and which finds the origin of drama in the sacred dance, a dance, of course, accompanied by gesture of <corr sic=pantomic>pantomimic</corr> character; combined with song, and later enriched by dialogue, this would give rise to the drama. If we further accept the view that the dialogue in prose was added from the ritual element seen in the abuse at the horse sacrifice and the Mah&amacr;vrata, then within the Vedic ritual we may discern all the elements for the growth of drama present.

<p>In this sense we may speak of the drama as having its origin in the Vedic period, but it may be doubted whether anything is gained by such a proposition. Unless the hymns of the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi> present us with real drama, which is most implausible, we have not the slightest evidence that the essential synthesis of elements and development of plot, which constitute a true <pb n=27 id=pb27 facs="f:027">drama, were made in the Vedic age. On the contrary, there is every reason to believe that it was through the use of epic recitations that the latent possibilities of drama were evoked, and the literary form created. One very important point in this regard has certainly often been neglected. The Sanskrit drama does not consist, as the theory suggests, of song and prose as its vital elements; the vast majority of the stanzas, which are one of its chief features, were recited, not sung, and it was doubtless from the epic that the practice of recitation was in the main derived. Professor Oldenberg<note n=1 id=n27.1><hi lang=de>Die Literatur des alten Indien</hi>, p. 241. In Mexico we have the material of a ritual drama (K. Th. Preuss, <hi lang=de>Archiv für Anthropologie</hi>, 1904, pp. 158 ff.), but not the epic element.</note> admits in fact the great importance of the epic on the development of drama, but it may be more accurate to say that without epic recitation there would and could have been no drama at all. Assuredly we have no clear proof of such a thing as drama existing until later than we have assurance of the recitation of epic passages by Granthikas, as will be seen below.





<pb n=28 id=pb28 facs="f:028">
<div1 id=ch2 n=II>
<head type=label>II</head>

<head>POST-VEDIC LITERATURE AND THE ORIGIN OF THE DRAMA</head>


<div2 id=ch2.1 n=1>
<head><ab type=divNum>1.</ab> <hi>The Epics</hi></head>

<p>The great epic of India, the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;rata</hi>, in the whole extent of its older portions, does not recognize in any explicit manner the existence of the drama.<note n=1 id=n28.1>Hopkins, <hi>The Great Epic of India</hi>, pp. 55 ff. N&amacr;&tdotb;aka in ii. 11. 36 is very late; JRAS. 1903, pp. 571 f.</note> The term Na&tdotb;a indeed occurs, and, if it meant actor, the existence of the drama would be proved, but it may equally well merely denote pantomimist. This conclusion, moreover, is strongly supported by the strange fact that, if the epic knew the drama, it should never mention any of its characteristics or such a standing character as the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka. There is, what is still more significant, even in the later parts of the epic, such as the Ç&amacr;nti and Anuç&amacr;sana Parvans, no clear allusion to the art, for the passage in the Ç&amacr;nti<note n=2 id=n28.2>xii. 140. 21.</note> in which Professor Hillebrandt has found an allusion to dramatic artists can perfectly well apply to pantomimes, and in the latter text<note n=3 id=n28.3>xiii. 33. 12.</note> the passage in which the commentator N&imacr;laka&ndotb;&tdotb;ha finds comedians and dancers (<hi lang=sa-Latn>na&tdotb;a-nartak&amacr;&hdotb;</hi>) yields perfectly good senses as pantomimists and dancers, both occupations there repudiated by Brahmins. To find the drama we are compelled to have recourse to the <hi>Hariva&ndota;ça</hi>,<note n=4 id=n28.4>ii. 88 ff. See § 3 below.</note> which is a deliberate continuation of the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;rata</hi>, and there we have explicit evidence, for we learn of players who made a drama out of the <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> legend. But this is of no importance for the purpose of determining the date of the drama; the <hi>Hariva&ndota;ça</hi> is of uncertain date, but in all probability, as we have it, it cannot be placed earlier than the second or third century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi>, long after the <pb n=29 id=pb29 facs="f:029">time when there is no doubt of the existence of a Sanskrit drama.

<p>The <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> lends no aid to the attempt to establish an early existence of drama; we hear of festivals and concourses (<hi lang=sa-Latn>sam&amacr;ja</hi>) where Na&tdotb;as and Nartakas delight themselves,<note n=1 id=n29.1>ii. 67. 15.</note> and even of the speaking of N&amacr;&tdotb;akas;<note n=2 id=n29.2>ii. 69. 3.</note> in another passage the term Vy&amacr;miçraka<note n=3 id=n29.3>ii. 1. 27; Hillebrandt<corr>,</corr> ZDMG. lxxii. 229, n. 1; <hi>contra</hi>, SBAW. 1916, p. 730.</note> denotes, if we believe the commentator, plays in mingled languages. But, accepting all these references as genuine, which we are not obliged to do, the passages have manifestly no claim to early date, for other reasons than the allusions, and leave us again without any early evidence.

<p>But, while the epics cannot be said to know the drama, there is abundant evidence of the strong influence on the development of the drama exercised by the recitation of the epics. The long continued popularity of these recitations is attested throughout the literature; at the beginning of the seventh century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi><note n=4 id=n29.4>Barth, <hi lang=fr>Inscr. Sansc. du Cambodge</hi>, p. 30. At the close of the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;rata</hi> the existence of such recitations is clearly recognized; Oldenberg, <hi lang=de>Das Mahabharata</hi>, p. 20.</note> a Brahmin, Somaçarman, akin to the royal house of Cambodia, presented to a temple in that far-off outpost of Indian civilization a complete copy of the <hi>Bh&amacr;rata</hi>, in order that regular recitations might take place, and almost contemporaneously B&amacr;&ndotb;a in the <hi>K&amacr;dambar&imacr;</hi> depicts the queen as hastening to the temple of Çiva to hear the recitation of the epic. Four centuries later K&sdotb;emendra reproaches his contemporaries with their equal eagerness to hear such recitations, and their reluctance to carry out in practice the excellent advice contained in them. We have vivid accounts from recent time of such recitations not only in temples but in villages, when the generosity of some rich man has secured the presence, if need be, for three months or longer of the reciters, Kathakas, to go over the <corr sic=hugh>huge</corr> poem, which claims to be an encyclopaedia of all useful knowledge as well as the best of poems. The reciters divide themselves into two classes, the P&amacr;&tdotb;hakas, who repeat the poem, and the Dh&amacr;rakas, who expound it in the vernacular for the edification of the people, whose deep interest in the recitations is attested; if the <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> is the epic chosen for recitation, the departure <pb n=30 id=pb30 facs="f:030">of the hero into exile excites their tears and sobs, even to the interruption of the recital; when he returns and ascends the throne the village is illuminated and garlanded.<note n=1 id=n30.1>Max Müller, <hi>India</hi>, p. 81. Cf. Winternitz, GIL. iii. 162, n. 1.</note> Fortunately we have in a bas-relief<note n=2 id=n30.2>E. Schlagintweit, <hi lang=de>India in Wort und Bild</hi>, i. 176.</note> from S&amacr;nchi, which may safely be placed before the Christian era, a representation of a group of these Kathakas. We see in it that they accompanied with music in some degree their recitations, danced, and indicated by gestures the sentiments of the characters they presented. We have thus something which in its nature is far from undramatic; given the use of dialogue, the drama would be present in embryo. This step is foreshadowed but not actually taken in the account given in the later additions to the <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi><note n=3 id=n30.3>vii. 93.</note> of the first recitation of that poem. V&amacr;lm&imacr;ki, the author of the narrative of R&amacr;ma&apos;s deeds, teaches the poem to Kuça and Lava, the children whom S&imacr;t&amacr; in exile bears to R&amacr;ma; they enter Ayodhy&amacr; at the moment when the king performs the horse sacrifice, and excite the curiosity of the king himself, who hears the recitation of his own deeds by the two rhapsodes, and recognizes them for his own sons.

<p>The term Bh&amacr;rata,<note n=4 id=n30.4>Lévi, TI. i. 311 f.</note> which is an appellation of the comedian in the later texts, attests doubtless the connexion of the rhapsodes with the growth of the drama. It has survived in the modern form of Bh&amacr;&tdotb; denoting a class of reciters, who are the inheritors of a tradition of recitation of the epics, and who are expert in genealogy, enjoy general consideration, and by their mere presence with a caravan assure its passage in safety. The Bh&amacr;ratas must be the rhapsodes of the Bh&amacr;rata tribe,<note n=5 id=n30.5>Macdonell and Keith, <hi>Vedic Index</hi>, ii. 94 ff.</note> whose fame is great in the early history of India, whose special fire is known to the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi>, and who have a special offering (<hi lang=sa-Latn>hotr&amacr;</hi>) of their own. The <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;rata</hi> is the great epic of the family, preserved by their care. With the passage of time the rhapsodes doubtless took upon them the newer art of drama. Bhavabh&umacr;ti in the <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi> shows himself conscious of the debts owed by the drama to the epic, and the clearest proof is now available in the dramas of Bh&amacr;sa, with their wide indebtedness to the great epic itself.

<pb n=31 id=pb31 facs="f:031"><p>The term Kuç&imacr;lava, which occasionally denotes actor, is apparently derived from the Kuça and Lava of the <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>; the mode of formation of the compound is indeed strange, for it is not obvious why it should have been formed on the mode of compounds in which the first member represents a woman&apos;s name, but it is equally, if not more difficult, to imagine how it could be derived from the prefix <hi lang=sa-Latn>ku</hi> and <hi>ç&imacr;la</hi> manners, denoting &lsquo;of bad morals&rsquo;. Weber&apos;s attempt to compare this name with Çail&umacr;&sdotb;a of the Vedic texts and Çil&amacr;lin, who is connected with a S&umacr;tra for Na&tdotb;as, is obviously impossible, and it may be that the name, derived originally from Kuça and Lava, was later by a witticism altered to Kuç&imacr;lava as a hit against the morals of the actors, which were recognized on every hand to be bad.<note n=1 id=n31.1>Konow, ID. p. 9; Lévi, TI. ii. 51. On these rhapsodes, cf. Jacobi, <hi>Das R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, pp. 62 ff.; GGA. 1899, pp. 877 f.; Hopkins, <hi>The Great Epic of India</hi>, pp. 364 ff.</note>


<div2 id=ch2.2 n=2>
<head><ab type=divNum>2.</ab> <hi>The Grammarians</hi></head>

<p>In P&amacr;&ndotb;ini<note n=2 id=n31.2>iv. 3. 110 f.</note> we find mention of Na&tdotb;as&umacr;tras, text-books for Na&tdotb;as, ascribed to Çil&amacr;lin and K&rdotb;ç&amacr;çva; the fact is recorded because of the formation of the names assumed by their followers, Çail&amacr;lins and K&rdotb;ç&amacr;çvins. The names are curious; it has been suggested by Professor Lévi to see in them ironical appellations; the K&rdotb;ç&amacr;çvins are those whose horses are meagre, with an ironic reference to the great Indo-Iranian hero K&rdotb;ç&amacr;çva, while the Çail&amacr;lins have nothing but stones for their beds in pitiful contrast with the fame of the Vedic school of that name, whose <hi>Çail&amacr;li Br&amacr;hma&ndotb;a</hi> is known to us. But we unfortunately are here as ever in no position to establish the meaning of Na&tdotb;a, which may mean no more than a pantomime. The conclusion is important, for P&amacr;&ndotb;ini&apos;s date is most probably the fourth century <hi rend=asc>B.C.</hi>, and the fact that he has no term certainly denoting drama is of significance.

<p>In Patañjali,<note n=3 id=n31.3>iii. 2. 111.</note> the author of the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi>, whose date is certainly to be placed with reasonable assurance about 140 <hi rend=asc>B.C.</hi>, we find much more effective evidence bearing on the existence of drama. We learn from his criticism on a rule laid down by his predecessor K&amacr;ty&amacr;yana, as to the use of the imperfect tense of things which a person has himself seen, that it was normal <pb n=32 id=pb32 facs="f:032">to use in his time phrases describing a past event as if it had occurred before the eyes of the speaker; we can understand this only of a character in a dramatic performance of some kind, and it is significant that the phrase cited in illustration of the usage is &lsquo;V&amacr;sudeva has slain Ka&ndota;sa&rsquo;. The reference is to the famous legend of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, son of Vasudeva, and his wicked uncle Ka&ndota;sa, who first sought to destroy him in his childhood, and afterward paid the penalty of his evil deeds by death at the hands of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a. This notice receives further elucidation by a famous passage, first adduced by Weber, in which Patañjali explains the justification of the use of phrases such as &lsquo;He causes the death of Ka&ndota;sa&rsquo;, and &lsquo;He causes the binding of Bali&rsquo;.<note n=1 id=n32.1><hi lang=sa-Latn>ye t&amacr;vad ete çobhanik&amacr; n&amacr;maite pratyak&sdotb;a&mdota; Ka&ndota;sa&mdota; gh&amacr;tayanti pratyak&sdotb;am Balim bandhayant&imacr;ti. citre&sdotb;u katham? citre&sdotb;v apy udg&umacr;r&ndotb;&amacr; nip&amacr;tit&amacr;ç ca prah&amacr;r&amacr; d&rdotb;çyante Ka&ndota;sakar&sdotb;a&ndotb;yaç ca. granthike&sdotb;u katha&mdota; yatra çabdaga&ddotb;um&amacr;tra&mdota; lak&sdotb;yate te &apos;pi hi te&sdotb;&amacr;m utpattiprabh&rdotb;ty &amacr; vin&amacr;ç&amacr;d &rdotb;ddh&imacr;r vy&amacr;cak&sdotb;&amacr;&ndotb;&amacr;&hdotb; sato buddhivi&sdotb;ay&amacr;n prak&amacr;çayanti. &amacr;taç ca sato vy&amacr;miçr&amacr; hi d&rdotb;çyante: kecit Ka&ndota;sabhakt&amacr; bhavanti, kecid V&amacr;sudevabhakt&amacr;&hdotb;. var&ndotb;&amacr;nyatva&mdota; khalv api pu&sdotb;yanti: kecit k&amacr;lamukh&amacr; bhavanti, kecid raktamukh&amacr;&hdotb;.</hi> See iii. I. 26. The text, uncertain in detail, must be corrected by replacing <hi lang=sa-Latn>buddh&imacr;r</hi> for the absurd <hi>&rdotb;ddh&imacr;r</hi> of some manuscripts only, defended by Lüders. See Weber, IS. xiii. 487 ff. Çaubhika is a variant.</note> Both these deeds, the actual killing, the actual binding, are deeds of the remote past; how then can the present be in place? The answer, we learn, is that the events are described in the present because the sense is, not that they are being actually done, but that they are being described. Of the modes of description no less than three are then set out. In the first place we have the case of the Çaubhikas or Çobhanikas, who before the eyes of the spectators actually carry out&mdash;naturally in appearance only in the first case&mdash;the killing of Ka&ndota;sa and the binding of Bali; they represent in fact by action, without words, so far as this passage formally tells us, the slaying of the wicked Ka&ndota;sa, the binding of the evil Bali. Secondly, we have the painters; they describe by their paintings, for on the canvases themselves we see the blows rained on Ka&ndota;sa and the dragging of him about; a painter, that is to say, kills Ka&ndota;sa and has Bali bound by painting a scene describing these incidents. Thirdly, we have those who use words, and not action of the Çaubhika type, the Granthikas; they also, while relating the fortunes of their subjects from their birth to their death, make them real to the minds of their audience, for they divide <pb n=33 id=pb33 facs="f:033">themselves into two parties, one set adhering to K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, and one to Ka&ndota;sa, and they adopt different colours, the adherents of Ka&ndota;sa black, and those of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a red, though, by what is probably an erroneous correction, the colours are ascribed in the inverse order by many of the manuscripts.

<p>This is clear and intelligible, and it is unfortunate that it has recently been misunderstood by Professor Lüders,<note n=1 id=n33.1>SBAW. 1916, pp. 698 ff. Cf. Hillebrandt, ZDMG. lxxii. 227 f.; Keith, <hi>Bulletin of <corr>the </corr>School of Oriental Studies</hi>, I. iv. 27 ff. Winternitz (ZDMG. lxxiv. 118 ff.) ineffectively supports Lüders, though he recognizes the extraordinary difficulties of this view. The error is due to the idea that one can only describe (<hi>&amacr;ca&sdotb;&tdotb;e</hi>) in words, ignoring art and action.</note> with disastrous results for the comprehension of the notice. The Çaubhikas are made to be persons who explain to the audience shadow pictures, a view which has not even the merit of Indian tradition, and, as will be seen below, contradicts entirely the facts known as to the shadow play in India, where it is recorded only in late mediaeval times. The traditional rendering in India of the statement is recorded by Kaiya&tdotb;a, more than a thousand years later; it is frankly obscure; Professor Lévi<note n=2 id=n33.2>TI. i. 315. The words are: <hi>Ka&ndota;s&amacr;dyanuk&amacr;ri&ndotb;&amacr;&mdota; na&tdotb;an&amacr;&mdota; vy&amacr;khy&amacr;nop&amacr;dhy&amacr;y&amacr;&hdotb;</hi>.</note> renders it as meaning that the Çaubhikas are those who teach actors, representing Ka&ndota;sa, and so on, the mode of recitation, a version which is doubtless very difficult. The sense accorded to it by Professor Lüders is that the Çaubhikas explain to the audience dumb actors, a form of drama which is recorded as performed by the Jh&amacr;&mdota;k&imacr;s of Bombay and Mathur&amacr; in modern India, but of which in ancient times we have no certainty, since this is the only passage which even remotely can be supposed to allude to it. The obvious view, that of Weber,<note n=3 id=n33.3>Weber might be interpreted as believing in an actual killing, but, if so, he was clearly in error, and in point of fact he merely gives this as possible (IS. xiii. 490). That Çaubhikas did manual acts and were not talkers primarily, if at all, is suggested by the use elsewhere of the term; thus in the <hi>K&amacr;vyam&imacr;m&amacr;&ndota;s&amacr;</hi>, p. 55, they are classed with rope-dancers and wrestlers.</note> that we have a reference to a pantomimic killing and binding, seems irresistible; the use of the causative is explained by this fact; if Bali and Ka&ndota;sa were persons of to-day the simple verb would express their binding and slaying; because it is mere actors, the causative is used, and its use denotes that the act is not now real but an exposition of a past act. &lsquo;He causes the binding of Bali&rsquo; <pb n=34 id=pb34 facs="f:034">means &lsquo;he describes the binding of Bali&rsquo;. The only legitimate doubt on the passage is that regarding the exact mode of performance of the Çaubhikas; the word <hi lang=sa-Latn>pratyak&sdotb;am</hi> in the text insists that it is done before the eyes of the audience, and we may justly assume that the Çaubhikas performed manual acts. Did they also use dialogue? There is nothing in the passage either to show that they did or that they did not; the contrast which follows later with Granthikas, whose medium was words, is sufficiently pointed if they used action as well as words. The most that can be said is that Çaubhika or Çobhanika does not obtain currency later as denoting an actor, which may tell against the view that Patañjali is here actually alluding to drama proper. Further we cannot go; to argue that, if he had known drama proper, he must have clearly mentioned it, is to ignore entirely the manner of Patañjali, whose silence as to what he must have known is as common as his incidental mention of current topics.

<p>The error of Professor Lüders in insisting on a literal interpretation of the passage as referring to different sorts of narrators by words comes out with special clearness as regards the second class of persons alluded to by Patañjali. That they are painters whose canvases are living speeches was clearly recognized by the commentators in India. Haradatta tells us in the simplest and plainest language that when men look at a picture on which is shown the death of Ka&ndota;sa at the hands of V&amacr;sudeva they interpret the picture as the slaying of the wicked Ka&ndota;sa by the blessed V&amacr;sudeva, and thus by the pictured V&amacr;sudeva cause to be slain the pictured Ka&ndota;sa, for this is the conception which they form as they gaze, and he adds, very naturally, that this explains the practice of saying of artists that they cause the slaying of Ka&ndota;sa, the binding of Bali.<note n=1 id=n34.1><hi lang=sa-Latn>ye &apos;pi citra&mdota; vy&amacr;cak&sdotb;ate &apos;yam Mathur&amacr;pr&amacr;s&amacr;do &apos;ya&mdota; Ka&ndota;so &apos;yam bhagav&amacr;n V&amacr;sudeva&hdotb; pravi&sdotb;&tdotb;a et&amacr;&hdotb; Ka&ndota;sakar&sdotb;i&ndotb;yo rajjava et&amacr; udg&umacr;r&ndotb;&amacr; nip&amacr;tit&amacr;ç ca prah&amacr;r&amacr; aya&mdota; hata&hdotb; Ka&ndota;so &apos;yam &amacr;k&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;a iti te &apos;pi citragata&mdota; Ka&ndota;sa&mdota; t&amacr;d&rdotb;çenaiva V&amacr;sudevena gh&amacr;tayanti. citre &apos;pi hi tadbuddhir eva paçyat&amacr;m. etena citralekhak&amacr; vy&amacr;khy&amacr;t&amacr;&hdotb;.</hi> On Lüders&apos; view the second sentence is useless.</note> It would be difficult to see how the idea could have been more forcibly expressed, but Professor Lüders interprets it in the sense that artists occasionally explain their own pictures to others, an idea which is not merely wholly impossible, but renders Haradatta&apos;s <pb n=35 id=pb35 facs="f:035">language nonsense. On this basis he finds that the Çaubhikas added to their business of explaining shadow pictures that of showing and explaining other pictures, in this respect again without any support from tradition.

<p>Finally Professor Lüders denies any division of parties among the Granthikas, whose name he derives, like the scholiasts, from the use of manuscript books in recitation, rejecting the idea of cyclic rhapsodes suggested by Dr. Dahlmann.<note n=1 id=n35.1><hi lang=de>Genesis des Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;rata</hi>, pp. 163 ff. Granthika occurs in MBh. xiv. 70. 7; cf. <hi>granthin</hi>, Manu, xii. 103.</note> The derivation is too speculative in sense to be relied upon, but there is no doubt that the Granthikas were reciters. Their exact means of expressing the sense is not quite clear owing to the unlucky divergence of reading in the text, and the fact that the precise meaning of the second word in the most probable reading (<hi lang=sa-Latn>çabda-ga&ddotb;u-m&amacr;tram</hi>)<note n=2 id=n35.2>SBAW. 1916, p. 736. Hillebrandt (ZDMG. lxxii. 228) criticises effectively Lüders&apos;s interpretation. Cf. <hi lang=sa-Latn>granthaga&ddotb;utva</hi> in R. i. 243.</note> is wholly unknown. It is, accordingly, wholly illegitimate to assert that they used words alone, and on the score of that to deny that they could be said to divide themselves into two parties, one of followers of Ka&ndota;sa, one of adherents of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, bearing appropriate colours. This view reduces us to the impossible theory that the division of parties refers to the audience. Apart from all questions of regard for the Sanskrit language, which Patañjali should be assumed capable of writing, the ludicrous result is achieved that among a pious audience of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a adorers we are to suppose that there were many who favoured Ka&ndota;sa, the cruel uncle whose vices are redeemed by not a single virtue, and for whose fate Sanskrit literature, pious and devout, shows not a sign of regret. The change of colour, which is asserted to be the only possible sense of the term <hi lang=sa-Latn>var&ndotb;&amacr;nyatvam</hi>, wholly without ground, is referred to the spectators, who turn red with anger if supporters of Ka&ndota;sa, black with fear if they support V&amacr;sudeva. Professor Hillebrandt, who has unfortunately accepted the new theory to the extent that he believes that there were persons who carried round pictures and explained them for a living, justly declines to believe in the possibility of a Hindu audience containing persons who wished the success of Ka&ndota;sa, and he accepts the plain fact that the Granthikas took parts. The colours he <pb n=36 id=pb36 facs="f:036">explains, however, as indicating the sentiments which the two parties feel, a view for which there is the authority of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> which ascribes to each sentiment an appropriate colour, and, accepting the reading of Kielhorn, he is compelled to assume that the supporters of Ka&ndota;sa on the stage showed as the dominant sentiment fury, while those of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a are reduced to manifest fear as the sentiment of their side. But it is frankly incredible that the followers of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, the invincible, who calmly and coolly proceeds from victory to victory culminating in the overthrow of his wicked uncle, accomplished with ease and celerity, should show fear as the dominant sentiment, and it is clear that on this view we should accept the reading which inverts the descriptions,<note n=1 id=n36.1>It is a confirmation of the incorrectness of Lüders&apos;s view that he is driven to render <hi lang=sa-Latn>v&rdotb;ddh&imacr;r</hi>, which he reads for <hi lang=sa-Latn>buddh&imacr;r</hi>, as &lsquo;<foreign lang=de>Schicksale</foreign>&rsquo;. Now <hi lang=sa-Latn>v&rdotb;ddhi</hi> cannot possibly be used in this sense; it means &lsquo;prosperity&rsquo;, and, applied to Ka&ndota;sa or Bali, it is ludicrous. What is meant is that, by forming parties, the Granthikas make real to the audience the feelings of the characters, a doctrine entirely in keeping with the duty of an actor according to N. Hillebrandt&apos;s view of the Çaubhikas as explaining the subject of the play to the audience, like the Sth&amacr;paka later (N. v. 154 ff.; DR. iii. 3; SD. 283), contradicts the word <hi lang=sa-Latn>pratyak&sdotb;am</hi>.</note> thus allotting to the supporters of Ka&ndota;sa the fear, to those of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a the fury of slaughter and revenge. But in this trait it is more probable, as will be seen below, that we have a trace of the religious origin of the drama.<note n=2 id=n36.2>Winternitz (ZDMG. lxxiv. 122) desires inversion, even on Lüders&apos;s theory, although Lüders attaches importance to the text.</note>


<div2 id=ch2.3 n=3>
<head><ab type=divNum>3.</ab> <hi>Religion and the Drama</hi></head>

<p>We seem in fact to have in the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi> evidence of a stage in which all the elements of drama were present; we have acting in dumb show, if not with words also; we have recitations divided between two parties. Moreover, we hear of Na&tdotb;as who not only recite but also sing; we find that in the days of the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi> the Na&tdotb;a&apos;s hunger is as proverbial as the dancing of the peacock, that it was no rare thing for him to receive blows, and that a special term, Bhr&umacr;ku&ndota;sa, existed to name him who played women&apos;s parts, appropriately made up.<note n=3 id=n36.3>i. 4. 29 (<hi lang=sa-Latn>na&tdotb;asya ç&rdotb;&ndotb;oti</hi>, <hi lang=sa-Latn>granthikasya ç&rdotb;&ndotb;oti</hi>); ii. 4. 77 (<hi lang=sa-Latn>ag&amacr;s&imacr;n na&tdotb;a&hdotb;</hi>); ii. 3. 67 (<hi lang=sa-Latn>na&tdotb;asya bhuktam</hi>); iii. 2. 127 (<hi lang=sa-Latn>na&tdotb;am &amacr;ghn&amacr;n&amacr;&hdotb;</hi>); iv. 1. 3.</note> The <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi> does not seem to recognize women as other than dancers or singers,<note n=4 id=n36.4>vi. 3. 43.</note> so that it may well be that in the infancy of the <pb n=37 id=pb37 facs="f:037">dramatic art the rôles of women were reserved for men, though in the classical drama this was by no means necessarily the case. We cannot absolutely prove that in Patañjali&apos;s time the drama in its full form of action allied to speech was present, but we know that all its elements existed, and we may legitimately and properly accept its existence in a primitive form.

<p>That form, from the express mention of the subjects of the dramatic exhibitions, we may deduce to have been of the nature of a religious drama. It is difficult not to see in the Ka&ndota;savadha, the death of Ka&ndota;sa at the hands of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, the refined version of an older vegetation ritual in which the representative of the outworn spirit of vegetation is destroyed. Colour is given to this theory by the remarkable fact that in one reading the partisans of the young K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a are red in hue, those of Ka&ndota;sa are black. Now as K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a&apos;s name indicates black, it would be almost inevitable that the original attribution of red to his followers should be corrected by well-meaning scribes to black, and this explains effectively the transposition found in the bulk of the manuscripts. In the red hue of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a&apos;s supporters as against the black of those of Ka&ndota;sa we probably have a distinct reminiscence of another side of the slaying of the vegetation spirit.<note n=1 id=n37.1>Keith, ZDMG. lxiv. 534 f.; JRAS. 1911, pp. 979 ff.; 1912, pp. 411 ff.</note> The contest is often presented as one between summer and winter, and we have seen in the Mah&amacr;vrata what is probably a primitive form of this contest; the white Vaiçya fights with the black Ç&umacr;dra for the sun, and attains possession of its symbolical form. The red of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a&apos;s following then proclaims him as the genius of summer who overcomes the darkness of the winter.

<p>With this view accords most interestingly the theory of the origin of the Greek drama from a mimic conflict of summer and winter, as developed by Dr. Farnell.<note n=2 id=n37.2><hi>The Cults of the Greek States</hi>, v. 233 ff. The variant theory of Miss Harrison, Prof. Gilbert Murray, and Dr. Cornford in <hi>Themis</hi>, and of Dieterich, <foreign lang=de><hi>Archiv</hi> f. <hi>Religionswissenschaft</hi></foreign>, xi. 163 ff., is much less plausible.</note> In the legend of the conflict between the Boiotian Xanthos and the Neleid Melanthos we hear that at the moment of conflict Melanthos descried a form beside his foe, whom he taunted with bringing a friend to aid him. Xanthos turned round, and Melanthos slew him. <pb n=38 id=pb38 facs="f:038">The form was that of Dionysos Melanaigis, and for his intervention the Athenians rewarded him by admission to the Apatouria, the festival of deceit. Thus the black Melanthos with the aid of Dionysos of the black goatskin slays the fair; the dark winter destroys the light of summer. Even in modern times in Northern Thrace<note n=1 id=n38.1>Dawkins, <hi>Journ. Hell. Stud.</hi>, 1906, pp. 191 ff.</note> is celebrated a popular festival in which a man clad in a goatskin is hailed as king, scatters seed over the crowd&mdash;obviously to secure fertility&mdash;and ultimately is cast into the river, the usual fate for the outworn spirit of vegetation. In a similar mummery performed near the ancient Thracian capital there is a band of mummers, clad in goatskins, of whom one is killed and lamented by his wife. It is natural to deduce hence that tragedy had its origin in a primitive passion-play performed by men in goatskins, in which an incarnation of a divine spirit was slain and lamented, whence the dirge-like nature of the Greek drama.

<p>The primitive Indian play differs in one essential from this suggested origin of tragedy; the victory lies, as we have seen, with K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, with the Vaiçya, not with the dark Ka&ndota;sa, the black Ç&umacr;dra. We have, therefore, not sorrow, though there is death, and the fact that the Sanskrit drama insists on a happy ending is unquestionably most effectively explained if it be brought into connexion with the fact of the origin of the drama in a passion play whose end was happiness through death, not grief. This view has received a remarkable measure of confirmation from the discovery of the plays of Bh&amacr;sa; that dramatist does not conform to the rule of the later theory that there must be no slaying on the stage, but he most assuredly conforms to the principle of the <hi>Ka&ndota;savadha</hi> that the slaying is to be of an enemy of the god; the <hi>&Umacr;rubha&nmacr;ga</hi>, which has erroneously<note n=2 id=n38.2>Lüders (SBAW. 1916, p. 718, n. 3) is responsible for the view that Duryodhana is the hero. Lindenau (BS. p. 30) accepts this, but gives the true facts (pp. 32, 33), without apparently realizing that the views are contradictory. The <hi>&Umacr;rubha&nmacr;ga&apos;s</hi> conclusion is happy, not tragic, for the worshipper of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a.</note> been treated as a tragedy is, on the contrary, the depicting of the deplorable fate of an enemy of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, and we have from Bh&amacr;sa himself the <hi>B&amacr;lacarita</hi> which describes the death of several monsters at K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a&apos;s hands, and finally of Ka&ndota;sa himself.

<p>In the recitation of the Granthikas divided into two parties <pb n=39 id=pb39 facs="f:039">we have an interesting parallel to the place played according to Aristotle<note n=1 id=n39.1><hi>Poetics</hi>, 1449 <hi>a</hi> 10 ff.</note> by the dithyramb in the development of the Greek drama. Action was required neither of the singers of the dithyramb nor of the Granthikas, but it was only necessary in one case and the other to introduce action, and the form of the drama would be complete.

<p>Both in the Greek and the Sanskrit drama the essential fact in the contest, from which their origin may thus be traced, is the existence of a conflict. In the Greek drama in its development this conflict came to dominate the play, and in the Indian drama this characteristic is far less prominent. But it is distinctly present in all the higher forms of the art, and we can hardly doubt that it was from this conflict that these higher forms were evolved from the simplicity of the early material out of which the drama rose.

<p>For the religious origin of drama a further fact can be adduced, the character of the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, the constant and trusted companion of the king, who is the normal hero of an Indian play. The name denotes him as given to abuse,<note n=2 id=n39.2>Cf. the connexion of Greek Comedy with ritual cathartic cursing; Keith, JRAS. 1912, p. 425, n. For less plausible theories see F. M. Cornford, <hi>The Origin of Attic Comedy</hi> (1914); Ridgeway, <hi>Dramas and Dramatic Dances</hi>, pp. 401 ff.</note> and not rarely in the dramas he and one of the attendants on the queen engage in contests of acrid repartee, in which he certainly does not fare the better. It would be absurd to ignore in this regard the dialogue between the Brahmin and the hetaera in the Mah&amacr;vrata, where the exchange of coarse abuse is intended as a fertility charm.

<p>Another religious element may, it has been suggested, be conjectured as present in the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, the reminiscence of the figure of the Ç&umacr;dra who is beaten in the ceremony of the purchase of the Soma; possibly it is to this that the hideous appearance attributed to the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka is due. Professor Hillebrandt<note n=3 id=n39.3>AID. p. 27. Cf. below, p. 51, n. 1.</note> compares the history of the Harlequin who was originally a representative of the Devil and not a figure of mirth. It may be that these factors concurred in shaping the character of the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, but the fact that he is treated as a Brahmin is conclusive that the abusive side of his character is the more <pb n=40 id=pb40 facs="f:040">important. It is to this doubtless that his use of Pr&amacr;krit is due; it cannot be conceived that a dialogue of abuse was carried on by the Brahmin in the sacred language, which the hetaera of the primitive social conditions of the Mah&amacr;vrata could not possibly be expected to appreciate. Professor Hillebrandt suggests indeed that there is change in the character of the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka in the literature as compared with the account given in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, but there is clearly no adequate ground for this view.

<p>There is further abundant evidence of the close connexion of the drama with religion; it is attested in the legend of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a whose feat of slaying Ka&ndota;sa is carried out in the amphitheatre in the presence of the public, where he defeats the wrestlers of his uncle&apos;s court, and finally slays the tyrant. The festival of his nativity is essentially a popular spectacle; as developed later, in detail which has often evoked comparison with the Nativity,<note n=1 id=n40.1>Weber, <hi>Ueber die K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;ajanm&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;am&imacr;</hi> (1868).</note> the young mother, Devak&imacr;, is shown on a couch in a stable, with her infant clinging to her; Yaçod&amacr; is also there with the little girl, who in the legend meets the fate intended for K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a by Ka&ndota;sa; gods and spirits surround them; Vasudeva stands sword in hand to guard them; the Apsarases sing, the Gandharvas dance, the shepherdesses celebrate the birth, and all night is spent by the audience in gazing at the gay scene. K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, again, is the lover of the shepherdesses and the inventor of the ardent dance of love, the R&amacr;sama&ndotb;&ddotb;ala. Of great importance in this regard is the persistence in popularity of the Y&amacr;tr&amacr;s, which have survived the decadence of the regular Sanskrit drama. They tell of the loves of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a and R&amacr;dh&amacr;, his favourite among the Gop&imacr;s, for cowherdesses replace in the pastoral the shepherdesses of European idyllic poetry. K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a is by no means a faithful lover, but the end is always the fruition of R&amacr;dh&amacr;&apos;s love for him. And in Jayadeva&apos;s <hi>G&imacr;tagovinda</hi> we have in literary form<note n=2 id=n40.2>The influence of the K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a legend is suggested on the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>; Gawro&nacute;ski, <hi lang=fr>Les sources de quelques drames indiens</hi>, pp. 33 ff. Cf. below, p. 130.</note> the expression of the substance of the Y&amacr;tr&amacr;, lyric songs, to which must be added the charms of music and the dance. A further consideration of the highest importance attests the influence of the K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a cult: the normal <pb n=41 id=pb41 facs="f:041">prose language of the drama is Çaurasen&imacr; Pr&amacr;krit, and we can only suppose that it is so because it was the ordinary speech of the people among whom the drama first developed into definite shape. Once this was established, we may feel assured, the usage would be continued wherever the drama spread; we have modern evidence of the persistence of the Brajbh&amacr;sh&amacr;, the language of the revival of the K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a cult after the Mahomedan invasions in the ancient home of Çaurasen&imacr;, as the language of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a devotion beyond the limits of its natural home.<note n=1 id=n41.1>Lévi, TI. i. 331 f. Cf. Bloch, <hi lang=fr>Langue Marathe</hi>, pp. ix. 12 f.</note> Mathur&amacr;, the great centre of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a worship, still celebrates the Holi festival with rites which resemble the May-day merriment of older England, and still more the phallic orgies of pagan Rome as described by Juvenal. It is an interesting coincidence with the comparison made by Growse<note n=2 id=n41.2><hi>Mathur&amacr;</hi>, pp. 91 f., 101 f.</note> of the Holi and the May-day rites that Harapras&amacr;d &Sacute;&amacr;strin should have found an explanation of the origin of the Indian drama in the fact that at the preliminaries of the play there is special attention devoted to the salutation of Indra&apos;s banner, which is a flagstaff decorated with colours and bunting.<note n=3 id=n41.3>JPASB. v. 351 ff.</note> The Indian legend of the origin of drama tells that, when Bharata was bidden teach on earth the divine art invented by Brahm&amacr;, the occasion decided upon was the banner festival (<hi lang=sa-Latn>dhvajamaha</hi>) of Indra. The Asuras rose in wrath, but Indra seized the staff of his banner and beat them off, whence the staff of the banner (<hi lang=sa-Latn>jarjara</hi>) is used as a protection at the beginning of the drama. The drama was, therefore, once connected with the ceremonies of bringing in the Maypole from the woods at the close of the winter, but in India this rite fell at the close of the rainy season, and the ceremony was converted into a festival of thanksgiving for Indra&apos;s victory over the clouds, the Asuras. The theory in itself is inadequate, but the preliminaries of the drama are sufficient to show the extraordinary importance attached to propitiation of the gods, a relic of the old religious service, which would be quite out of place if the origin of the drama had been secular.

<p>The importance of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a must not cause us to ignore the prominent place occupied by Çiva in the history of the drama. <pb n=42 id=pb42 facs="f:042">To him and his spouse are ascribed the invention of the T&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;ava<note n=1 id=n42.1>Megasthenes ascribed the Kordax to the Indian Dionysos (Çiva); Arrian, <hi>Ind.</hi> 7. Bloch (ZDMG. lxii. 655) exaggerates his importance.</note> and the L&amacr;sya, the violent and the tender and seductive dances, which are so important an element in the representation of a play. Nor is it surprising that a god who in the Vedic period itself is hailed as the patron of men of every profession and occupation should be regarded as the special patron of the artists. But it is probable that this importance in the drama is later than that of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, and it is not without significance that Bh&amacr;sa, who is older than any of the other classical dramatists, unlike them, celebrates in full K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, and is a Vai&sdotb;&ndotb;ava, while Ç&umacr;draka, K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, Har&sdotb;a, and Bhavabh&umacr;ti alike are adorers of Çiva in their prefaces. The <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi> of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa introduces a dancing-master who speaks of the creation of the dance by the god and its close connexion with the drama. The sect of the P&amacr;çupatas, adorers of Çiva as lord of creatures, include in their ritual the song and the dance, the latter consisting in expressing the sentiments of the devotees by means of corporeal movement in accord with the rules of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>. In the decadent ceremonial of the Tantras the ritual includes the representation of Çiva by men, and of his spouse as Çakti, female energy, by women.

<p>The part of R&amacr;ma in the growth of drama was certainly not less important than that of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a himself, for the recitation of the <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> was popular throughout the country, and has persisted in vogue. The popularity of the story is proved to the full by the effect of the R&amacr;m-L&imacr;l&amacr; or Daç&amacr;rha festival, at which the story is presented in dumb show, children taking the places of R&amacr;ma, S&imacr;t&amacr;, and Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a before a vast concourse of pilgrims and others. No effort is made to speak the parts, but a series of tableaux recalls to the minds of the devotees, to whom the whole tale is familiar, the course of the history of the hero, his banishment, his search for S&imacr;t&amacr;, and his final triumph. In R&amacr;ma&apos;s case the influence of the epic on the drama appears in its full development.<note n=2 id=n42.2>Cf. Ridgeway, <hi>Dramas and Dramatic Dances</hi>, p. 190, and pp. 192 ff. on modern Indian drama in general.</note>

<p>The religious importance of the drama is seen distinctly in <pb n=43 id=pb43 facs="f:043">the attitude of the Buddhists towards it.<note n=1 id=n43.1>Lévi, TI. i. 319 ff. That any of the early Buddhist texts (e.g. <hi>Padh&amacr;nasutta</hi>, <hi>Pabbajj&amacr;sutta</hi>; <hi>M&amacr;rasa&mdota;yutta</hi>, <hi>Bhikkhun&imacr;sa&mdota;yutta</hi>; <hi>Chaddanta-</hi>, <hi>Ummadant&imacr;-</hi>, <hi>Mah&amacr;janaka-</hi>, or <hi>Candakinnara-j&amacr;taka</hi>; <hi>Therag&amacr;th&amacr;</hi>, 866 ff.; <hi>Ther&imacr;g&amacr;th&amacr;</hi>, 912 ff.) is really dramatic is out of the question; cf. Winternitz, VOJ. xxvii. 38 f.</note> The extreme dubiety of the date of the Buddhist Suttas renders it impossible to come to any satisfactory decision regarding the existence of drama at any early date, while the terms employed, such as Vis&umacr;kadassana, Nacca, and Pekkh&amacr;, and the reference to Samajjas leave us wholly without any ground for belief in an actual drama. We see, however, that the objection of the sacred Canon to monks engaging in the amusement of watching these shows, whatever their nature, was gradually overcome, and it is an important fact that the earliest dramas known to us by fragments are the Buddhist dramas of Açvagho&sdotb;a. With the acceptance of the drama, the <hi>Lalitavistara</hi><note n=2 id=n43.2>xii. p. 178. Drama is alluded to in <hi>Divy&amacr;vad&amacr;na</hi>, pp. 357, 360, 361.</note> does not hesitate to speak of the Buddha as including knowledge of the drama as among his accomplishments; the Buddha is even called one who has entered to gaze on the drama of the Great Law. The legend is willing to admit that even in Buddha&apos;s time there were dramas, for Bimbis&amacr;ra had one performed in honour of a pair of N&amacr;ga kings,<note n=3 id=n43.3>Schiefner, IS. iii. 483, <hi>Indian Tales</hi>, pp. 236 ff.</note> and the <hi>Avad&amacr;naçataka</hi>,<note n=4 id=n43.4>ii. 24 (75).</note> a collection of pious tales, places the drama in remote antiquity. It was performed by the bidding of Krakucchanda, a far distant Buddha in the city Çobh&amacr;vat&imacr; by a troupe of actors; the director undertook the rôle of the Buddha himself, while the other members of the troupe took the rôle of monks; the same troupe in a later age, under Gautama the Buddha himself, performed at R&amacr;jag&rdotb;ha, the actress Kuvalay&amacr; gaining enormous fame, and seducing the monks, until the Buddha terminated her career by turning her into a hideous old woman. She then repented and attained the rank of a saint. The same idea of a play bearing on the life of the Buddha himself is preserved in another tale in Tibet where an actor from the south sets up in rivalry with the monks in giving representations of the life of the Buddha. These Buddhist dramas have left their imprint on the form of the <hi>Saddharmapu&ndotb;&ddotb;ar&imacr;ka</hi>, the Lotus of the Good Law, itself, which has none of the epic character of the <hi>Lalitavistara</hi>, but is presented <pb n=44 id=pb44 facs="f:044">as a series of dialogues in which the Buddha himself, now supernatural, is the chief, but not the only interlocutor. The same love of the Buddhists for artistic effects is seen in the use of music, song, dance, and some scenic effects in the ceremonial attaching to the foundation of Th&umacr;pas in Ceylon by a prince of the royal house; the <hi>Mah&amacr;va&ndota;sa</hi> assumes that dramas were displayed on such occasions, though this may be an anachronism. The frescoes of <corr sic="Aja&ndotb;&tdotb;&amacr;">Ajant&amacr;</corr> show the keen appreciation felt for music, song, and the dance, though they date from a time when there is certain evidence of the full existence of the drama. We find also in Tibet<note n=1 id=n44.1>E. Schlagintweit, <hi>Buddhism in Tibet</hi>, p. 233; JASB. 1865, p. 71. Ridgeway&apos;s <hi>Dramas, &amp;c.</hi>, ignores Tibet. For similar Chinese performances, see <hi lang=fr>Annales Guimet</hi>, xii. 416 f.</note> the relics of ancient popular religious plays in the contests between the spirits of good and those of evil for mankind, which are part of the spring and autumn festivals. The actors wear strange garments and masks; monks represent the good spirits, laymen the evil spirits of men. The whole company first sings prayers and benedictions; then an evil spirit seeks to seduce into evil a man; he would yield but for the intervention of his friends; the evil spirits then arrive in force, a struggle ensues, in which the men would be defeated but for the intervention of the good spirits, and the whole ends with the chasing away with blows of the representatives of the spirits of evil.

<p>With Jainism it is as with Buddhism; we find censure of such ideal enjoyments as the arts akin to the drama, but also recognition of song, music, dance, and scenic presentations in the Canon.<note n=2 id=n44.2><hi>&Amacr;y&amacr;ra&mdota;ga Sutta</hi>, ii. 11. 14; <hi>R&amacr;japraçn&imacr;ya</hi>, IS. xvi. 385. The love of the Indians for song and dance is recorded by Greek tradition; Arrian, <hi>Anabasis</hi>, vi. 2.</note> But it is hopeless, in view of the utter uncertainty of the date of that collection, to draw any conclusion from it as to the age of the drama. As in the case of Buddhism, Jainism in its development was glad to have recourse to the drama as a means of propagating its beliefs.<note n=3 id=n44.3>Unfortunately the date of this change of view is uncertain. No early Jain drama is certainly recorded. A number of mediaeval works have recently been printed; see E. Hultzsch, ZDMG. lxxv. 59 ff.</note>

<p>The evidence is conclusive on the close connexion of religion and the drama, and it strongly suggests that it was from religion <pb n=45 id=pb45 facs="f:045">that the decisive impulse to dramatic creation was given. The importance of the epic is doubtless enormous, but the mere recitation of the epics, however closely it might approach to the drama, does not overstep the bounds. The element which fails to be added is that of the dramatic contest, the Agon of the Greek drama. That this was supplied by the development of such primitive vegetation rituals as that of the Mah&amacr;vrata, until they assumed the concrete and human form of the K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a and Ka&ndota;sa legend would be a conjecture worth consideration, but without possibility of proof if we had not the notice of the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi> which expressly shows that the story of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a and Ka&ndota;sa could both be represented by Granthikas, who coloured their faces and expressed vividly the emotions of those whom they represented, but also, in dumb show seemingly, by Çaubhikas. If there did not exist an Indian drama proper, in which these sides were combined when Patañjali wrote, it is fair to say that it would be surprising if it did not develop shortly afterwards, and we have perfectly certain proof that the Na&tdotb;as of Patañjali were much more than dancers or acrobats; they sang and recited. The balance of probability, therefore, is that the Sanskrit drama came into being shortly after, if not before, the middle of the second century <hi rend=asc>B.C.</hi>, and that it was evoked by the combination of epic recitations with the dramatic moment of the K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a legend, in which a young god strives against and overcomes enemies.

<p>The drama which was nascent in Patañjali&apos;s time must be taken to have been, like the classical drama, one in which Sanskrit was mingled with Pr&amacr;krit in the speeches of the characters. The epic recitations of the slaying of Ka&ndota;sa which he records must have been in Sanskrit, but, if the drama was to be popular&mdash;and the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> in its tale of the origin of the art recognizes both its epic and popular characteristics, the humble people who figured in it must have been allowed to speak in their own vernacular; this accords brilliantly with the presence of Çaurasen&imacr; as the normal prose of the drama of the classical stage. A different view is taken by Professor Lévi,<note n=1 id=n45.1>JA. sér. 9, xix. 95 ff. If this had been the case, one would have found references freely to the literature in H&amacr;la, where only v. 344 alludes to the P&umacr;rvara&nmacr;ga of the N&amacr;&tdotb;aka (<hi lang=sa-Latn>rai&ndotb;&amacr;&ddotb;aapuvvara&mdota;gassa</hi>).</note> <pb n=46 id=pb46 facs="f:046">who conceives that the drama sprang first into being in Pr&amacr;krit, while Sanskrit was only later applied at the time when Sanskrit, long reserved as a sacred language, re-entered into use as the language of literature; India, he contends, was never anxious for contact with reality, and it is absurd to suppose that the mixture of languages was adopted as a representation of the actual speech-usage of the time and circles in which drama came into being. This contention is supported by the observation that a number of the technical terms of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> are of strange appearance, and the frequency of cerebral letters in them suggests Pr&amacr;krit origin. The contention can hardly be treated as satisfactory, nor is it clear how it can possibly be reconciled with the evidence of Patañjali. The early drama, it seems clear, was not secular in origin, and Professor Lévi emphasizes its dependence on the cult of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a; to refuse to use Sanskrit in it, therefore, would be extremely strange, unless we are to assume that the existence of true drama goes back to a period considerably earlier than Patañjali, and that it came into being among a milieu which was not Brahminical. There are very serious difficulties in such a theory; we may legitimately hold that such a literary form as the true drama was not created until the Brahmin genius fused the ethic and religious agonistic motives into a new creation of the highest importance for the literary history of India. The presence of a number of Pr&amacr;krit terms in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> is probable, but it does not mean that a theory of drama was first excogitated in Pr&amacr;krit; the main theory in all its essentials is expressed in Sanskrit, and all that is borrowed from Pr&amacr;krit is some technical terms of subsidiary importance, borrowed, doubtless, from the minor arts, which go to aid but do not constitute the drama, song, music, dancing, and the mimetic art.

<p>The religious origin of the Sanskrit drama in K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a worship is also admitted as part, however, of a wider thesis by Dr. Ridgeway,<note n=1 id=n46.1><hi>The Origin of Tragedy</hi> (1910); <hi>Dramas and Dramatic Dances of non-European Races</hi> (1915); JRAS. 1916, pp. 821 ff.; Keith, JRAS. 1916, pp. 335 ff.; 1917, pp. 140 ff. G. Norwood (<hi>Greek Tragedy</hi>, pp. 2 f.) rejects Ridgeway&apos;s view for Greece, and see Keith, JRAS. 1912, pp. 411 ff.</note> who contends that Greek drama, and drama all over the world, are the outcome of the reverence paid to the spirits <pb n=47 id=pb47 facs="f:047">of the dead, which again is the source of all religion, a revival in fact of the doctrine of animism in one of its connotations. The contention as applied to the Indian drama involves the view that the actors in the primitive drama were representatives of the spirits of the dead, and that the performance was meant to gratify the dead. It is supported by the doctrine that not only R&amacr;ma and K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a were believed once to be men, but that Çiva himself had this origin;<note n=1 id=n47.1><hi>Drama, &amp;c.</hi>, p. 129 asserts this as the view of &lsquo;the best authorities&rsquo;; very wisely he does not refer to these amazing authorities. Cf. E. Arbman, <hi>Rudra</hi> (Uppsala, 1922); Keith, <hi>Indian Mythology</hi>, pp. 81 ff.</note> all gods indeed are derived from the memory of noble men. The evidence adduced for this thesis is simply non-existent. A valuable collection of material due to Sir J. H. Marshall proves the prevalence throughout India of popular dramatic performances celebrating the deeds of R&amacr;ma and K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, and the modern Indian drama deals also with the lives of distinguished historical characters such as Açoka or Candragupta. But there is nothing to show that the idea of gratifying the dead by the performances of dramatic scenes based on their history was ever present to any mind in India, either early or late. R&amacr;ma and K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a to their worshippers were long before the rise of so late an art as drama, just like Çiva, great gods, of whom it would be absurd to think as dead men requiring funeral rites to give them pleasure. Nor is it necessary further to criticize his reconstruction of Vedic religion on the basis of his animistic theory, for these issues of origins have no possible relevance to the specific question of the origin of the Indian drama. Whether elsewhere the worship of the dead resulted in drama is a matter open to grave doubt; certainly in the case of the Greek drama, which offers the most interesting parallel to that of India, the evidence of derivation from funeral games is wholly defective.

<p>Definite support for this view of the origin of drama may be found in the accounts of dramatic performances which are given in the <hi>Hariva&ndota;ça</hi>, the supplement of the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;rata</hi>. That work cannot, as has been mentioned, be dated with any certainty or probability earlier than the dramas of Açvagho&sdotb;a, and, therefore, it cannot be appealed to as the earliest mention now extant of the dramatic art. But it is of value as showing how closely <pb n=48 id=pb48 facs="f:048">connected the drama was in early times with the K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a cult, thus supplementing the conclusions to be derived from the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi>, and falling into line with the evidence of Bh&amacr;sa.

<p>At the festival performed by the Y&amacr;davas after the death of Andhaka, we find that the women of the place danced and sang to music, while K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a induced celestial nymphs to aid the merriment by similar exhibitions, including a representation by the Apsarases, apparently by dancing, of the death of Ka&ndota;sa and Pralamba, the fall of C&amacr;&ndotb;&umacr;ra in the amphitheatre, and various other exploits of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a. After they had performed, the sage N&amacr;rada amused the audience by a series of what may fairly be called comic turns; he imitated the gestures, the movements, and even the laughter of such distinguished personages as Satyabh&amacr;m&amacr;, Keçava, Arjuna, Baladeva, and the young princess, the daughter of Revata, causing infinite amusement to the audience, and reminding us of the part played by the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka in the drama. The Y&amacr;davas then supped, and this enjoyment was followed by further songs and dances by the Apsarases, whose performance thus resembled a modern ballet with songs interspersed.<note n=1 id=n48.1>ii. 88.</note>

<p>In a later passage<note n=2 id=n48.2>ii. 91. 26 ff.; 93. 1 ff. Cf. Hertel, VOJ. xxiv. 117 ff.; Ravivarman, <hi>Pradyumn&amacr;bhyudaya</hi>, Act III, p. 23.</note> in connexion with the story of the demon Vajran&amacr;bha, whom Indra asked K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a to dispose of, we learn of an actor Bhadra who delighted all by his excellent power of representation; Vajran&amacr;bha is induced to demand his presence in his abode, and K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a&apos;s son Pradyumna and his friends disguise themselves to penetrate there; Pradyumna is to be the hero, S&amacr;mba the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, and Gada the assistant of the stage director, while maidens, skilled in song, dance, and music, are the actresses; they delight the demons by presenting the story of Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u&apos;s descent on earth to slay the chief of the R&amacr;k&sdotb;asas, a dramatised version of the <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, presenting the figures of R&amacr;ma, his brother, and in special the episode of &Rdotb;&sdotb;yaç&rdotb;&nmacr;ga and Ç&amacr;nt&amacr;, that curious old legend based on a fertility- and rain-ritual.<note n=3 id=n48.3>Cf. von Schroeder, <hi lang=de>Mysterium und Mimus</hi>, pp. 292 ff. That this was originally a ritual drama is most improbable.</note> After the play the actors showed their skill in depicting <pb n=49 id=pb49 facs="f:049">situations suggested by their hosts, and Vajran&amacr;bha himself induces them to perform an episode from the legend of Kubera, the rendezvous of Rambh&amacr;; after music from the orchestra the actresses sing, Pradyumna enters and recites the benediction, and then a verse on the descent of the Ganges, which is connected with the subject-matter of the piece; he then assumes the <corr sic=role>rôle</corr> of Nalak&umacr;bara, S&amacr;mba is his Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, Ç&umacr;ra plays R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, Manovat&imacr; Rambh&amacr;. Nalak&umacr;bara curses R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, and consoles Rambh&amacr;, and the audience was delighted by the skilled acting of the Y&amacr;davas, who by a magic illusion had presented mount Kail&amacr;sa on the stage.


<div2 id=ch2.4 n=4>
<head><ab type=divNum>4.</ab> <hi>Theories of the Secular Origin of the Drama</hi></head>

<p>Professors Hillebrandt<note n=1 id=n49.1>AID. pp. 22 ff.</note> and Konow<note n=2 id=n49.2>ID. pp. 42 ff.</note> agree in the main in maintaining the view that it is an error to look to religious ceremonies as explaining the origin of the drama. True, these ceremonies have a share in the development of the drama, but they themselves are merely the introduction into the ritual of elements which have a popular origin. We are to believe that a popular mime existed, which, with the epic, lies at the bottom of the Sanskrit drama.

<p>It must be admitted at once that we have extremely little authentic information regarding the performers of these mimes, believed to have existed before the origin of drama. The statements made by Professor Konow, who finds in them experts in song, dance, music, but also in matters such as jugglery, pantomime, and the allied arts, all rest on evidence which is either contemporary with the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi> or later than it; the fact that Na&tdotb;as sang is recorded for us in the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi>, which of course may refer to genuine actors, and not to professors of the mime, and their connexion with sweet words is attested in the J&amacr;taka prose only, which dates several centuries after the existence of the true drama. We need not, of course, doubt that music, song, and dance, popular in the Vedic age, preserved that character throughout the later period, and we have evidence from Açoka&apos;s time onwards of the existence of Sam&amacr;jas which he condemned, doubtless because of the fights of animals which took <pb n=50 id=pb50 facs="f:050">place at them.<note n=1 id=n50.1>Hardy, <hi>Album Kern</hi>, pp. 61 f.; Thomas, JRAS. 1914, pp. 392 f.</note> That Na&tdotb;as and Nartakas were present at such festivals we learn from the <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>; but we cannot say whether pantomimes and dancers or actors and dancers are referred to. Our knowledge, in fact, of the primitive mime is hypothetical, and it rests in effect on certain considerations which Professor Hillebrandt adduces to show a popular as opposed to a religious origin for drama. His view is supported by the general argument that the drama as comedy is a natural expression of man&apos;s primitive life of pleasure and appreciation of humour and wit. It is, however, unnecessary to enter into any examination of this general principle, which he defends against the theory accepted by Dr. Gray that it is highly problematical whether any view of pleasure to the actors or audience is associated with primitive drama.<note n=2 id=n50.2>ERE. iv. 868.</note> These ultimate origins are a matter of indifference to the concrete question of the origin of so late a production as the classical drama of India. That the mimetic character is natural to man may be granted; the essential point in question is whether the Sanskrit drama in its characteristics shows signs of religious or secular origin.

<p>Of the points adduced by Professor Hillebrandt most have clearly no relevance in the argument. The use of Sanskrit and dialects in the classical drama is claimed as a proof of popular origin; as has been explained above, the Pr&amacr;krit element is due to the fact that the drama contains an essential popular, but also religious, element, the K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a worship. The mixture of prose and song, and the union of both with music and the dance, are as natural on the theory of religious origin as on that of secular derivation. The simplicity of the Indian stage, which knows no arrangements for providing changes of scenery, is certainly no proof of secular origin; the Vedic religion is singularly sparing in any external apparatus, and there is the strongest similarity between its practice to mark out altars for its great sacrifices at pleasure, and to have no regular sacrificial buildings, and the tradition throughout the Sanskrit dramas which neither requires nor needs fixed theatres.

<p>The popular origin of the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka is obvious, but the point is whether this origin is religious or secular, and we have seen <pb n=51 id=pb51 facs="f:051">that the Vedic literature offers us in the Brahmin of the Mah&amacr;vrata the prototype, possibly with reminiscences of the Ç&umacr;dra in the Soma sale, of this figure, a fact admitted by the supporters of the theory of secular origin. It is manifestly unnecessary and illegitimate, when the descent of this figure from the Vedic literature is clear, to insist that it was borrowed directly from popular usage, for which there is no proof, but only conjecture.

<p>There remains the argument derived from the fact that the classical drama usually begins with a dialogue between the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra and the Na&tdotb;&imacr;, who is usually represented as his wife; in this we have, it is said, a reflex of the old popular mime. But an examination of the practice and theory, as found in Bh&amacr;sa and the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, shows that we have no simple or naïve arrangement, but a very elaborate literary device by which the actors bridge over the transition from the preliminaries of the drama to the drama itself. The preliminaries are essentially popular religion, and the detail was left largely in the hands of the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra and his assistants, aided by a chorus of dancers and by musicians; they are doubtless older than the drama, and it was an ingenious and happy device which was invented to carry on the preliminaries, so that the transition to the drama was effective and satisfactory. It is, however, a perversion of all probability to find in this item the trace of a primitive popular secular performance.

<p>The evidence, therefore, for a secular origin disappears; it is curious, indeed, that Professor Hillebrandt<note n=1 id=n51.1>AID. p. 25. Lindenau (BS. p. 45) sees in V&rdotb;&sdotb;&amacr;kapi of <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi>, x. 86, the prototype of the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, as a maker of mischief and as the god&apos;s companion, but this is far-fetched. Hertel (<hi lang=de>Literarisches Zentralbl.</hi> 1917, pp. 1198 ff.) lays stress on the fact that at the royal courts the king had normally a jester to amuse him. This may easily have served to affect the figure of this character, if of religious origin. For older views, cf. J. Huizinga, <hi lang=nl>De <corr sic="Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka">Vidû&sdotb;aka</corr> en het indisch tooneel</hi> (Groningen, 1897); F. <corr sic=Cimmini>Cimmino</corr>, <hi lang=it>Atti della reale Accademia di Archeologia, Lettere <corr sic=et>e</corr> Belle Arti</hi> (Naples, 1893), xv. 97 ff.; M. Schuyler, JAOS. xx. 338 ff.; P. E. Pavolini, <hi lang=it>Studi italiani di filologia indo-iranica</hi>, ii. 88 f.</note> himself adduces proof that the western parallel of the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka is connected with religious ceremonies rather than a secular creation. But what is most remarkable of all is that Professor Konow adduces as evidence of the secular origin of the drama the Y&amacr;tr&amacr;s, which are essentially bound up with the religion of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, and the rough dramatic sketches performed at Almora at the Holi festival, also <pb n=52 id=pb52 facs="f:052">essentially religious.<note n=1 id=n52.1>TD. pp. 43 f. Cf. <corr sic="Nisi&kdotb;â&ndota;ta">Ni&sdotb;ikânta</corr> Chattopâdhyâya, <hi>The Yâtrâs</hi> (1882).</note> It is indeed to ignore how essentially religion enters into the life of the Hindu to imagine that it is possible to trace the beginnings of drama to a detached love of amusement. It is apparently difficult for the modern mind to appreciate that religion may cover matters which to us appear scarcely connected with it or even repugnant; but this is a delusion largely due to the narrower and more exalted conception of religion of the northern and western lands of Europe.

<p>Less plausible still is the attempt of Pischel<note n=2 id=n52.2><hi lang=de>Die Heimat des Puppenspiels</hi> (1902). Obvious objections are given by Ridgeway, <hi>Dramas, &amp;c.</hi>, pp. 164 ff.</note> to find evidence that the puppet-play is the source of the Sanskrit drama, and that moreover it has its home in India, whence it has spread over the world. The curious and odd art may indeed have an Indian origin, but it would be wholly unwise to suppose that the drama is due to it, nor is the theory apparently accepted on any side at the present time. The existence of such a play is attested by the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;rata</hi>,<note n=3 id=n52.3>iii. 30. 23; v. 39. 1.</note> though the antiquity of the device is not thus made clear; in the <hi>Kath&amacr;sarits&amacr;gara</hi>, following perhaps the <hi>B&rdotb;hatkath&amacr;</hi> of Gu&ndotb;&amacr;&ddotb;hya, possibly of the third century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi>, we hear of a damsel, daughter of the wonderful craftsman Asura Maya, who amused her companion with puppets which could speak, dance, fly, fetch water, or pluck and bring a garland. In the <hi>B&amacr;lar&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> of R&amacr;jaçekhara R&amacr;va&ndotb;a is represented as deceived by a puppet made to resemble S&imacr;t&amacr;, in whose mouth a parrot was placed to give his entreaties suitable replies. Sha&ndota;kar P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;ura&ndota;g Pa&ndotb;&ddotb;it<note n=4 id=n52.4><hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;ya</hi>, pp. 4 f.</note> records of his time that in the Mar&amacr;&tdotb;ha and Kanarese country there are travelling marionette theatres, the only form of drama known in the villages; the puppets made of wood or paper are managed by the director, whose style is S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra; they can stand or lie, dance or fight. From this puppet-play, it was suggested, the names of the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra, as the puller of the strings, and of the Sth&amacr;paka, arranger, his assistant, passed over to the legitimate drama. The Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, in Pischel&apos;s view, owed also his origin to the puppet-play.

<p>Professor Hillebrandt<note n=5 id=n52.5>AID. p. 8; ZDMG. lxxii. 231.</note> has argued against this theory on the ground that the puppet-play assumes the pre-existence of the <pb n=53 id=pb53 facs="f:053">drama, on which it must essentially be based, and he then uses the early date of the puppet-play as a proof of the still earlier existence of the drama. The latter argument, however, is unsatisfactory on various grounds. Apart from the fact that we cannot date the epic references or prove them earlier than the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi>, we have the doubt whether such a contention can possibly be justified. The use of puppets is primarily, of course, derived from the make-belief of children in playing with dolls; the terms for puppets which denote &lsquo;little daughter&rsquo; (<hi lang=sa-Latn>putrik&amacr;</hi>, <hi lang=sa-Latn>puttal&imacr;</hi>, <hi lang=sa-Latn>puttalik&amacr;</hi>, <hi lang=sa-Latn>duhit&rdotb;k&amacr;</hi>), show this clearly enough, and the popularity of puppets is indicated by the erotic game known as the imitation of puppets, where the word for puppet (<hi lang=sa-Latn>p&amacr;ñc&amacr;l&imacr;</hi>) suggests that the home of the puppet-play in India was the Pañc&amacr;la country. The growth of the drama doubtless brought with it the use of puppets to imitate it in brief, and from the drama came the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, and not <hi>vice versa</hi>.

<p>Though Pischel&apos;s theory<note n=1 id=n53.1>SBAW. 1906, pp. 481 ff.</note> of the puppet-play as the origin of drama has failed to find supporters, the shadow play, on whose importance in India he was the first to lay stress, has emerged in lieu in the hands of Professor Lüders<note n=2 id=n53.2>SBAW. 1916, pp. 698 ff. <hi>Contra</hi>, Hillebrandt, ZDMG. lxxii. 230 f. Winternitz (ZDMG. lxxiv. 120) reduces the Çaubhikas to people who tell tales of what is depicted on pictures, a clearly impossible version, but valid against Lüders.</note> as an essential element in the development of the Sanskrit drama, a position accepted by Professor Konow. The place found for the drama is in connexion with the displays of the Çaubhikas of the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi>. Owing to the misinterpretation of that passage it is held that the Çaubhikas were persons who explained matters to the audience to supplement either dumb actors<note n=3 id=n53.3>Based on Kaiya&tdotb;a&apos;s version of Çaubhika: <hi>Ka&mdota;s&amacr;dyanuk&amacr;ri&ndotb;&amacr;&mdota; na&tdotb;&amacr;n&amacr;&mdota; vy&amacr;khy&amacr;nop&amacr;dhy&amacr;y&amacr;&hdotb;</hi>. This is clearly incompatible with Lüders&apos;s view, as he admits (pp. 720 f.). Kaiya&tdotb;a is far too late for useful evidence.</note> or shadow figures. It is admitted by Professor Lüders that there is no proof which of these two eventualities is correct, but he endeavours both to prove the existence of the shadow-play in early India and to show that the Çaubhikas had the function of showing them. Based on this misinterpretation of the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi> and on the hypotheses&mdash;wholly in the air&mdash;which it necessitates, is his view that the influence of the epic on the drama was conveyed through <pb n=54 id=pb54 facs="f:054">the use of shadow-figures to illustrate the epic recitation; this, united with the art of the old Na&tdotb;as, gave birth to drama, though he is not certain whether such a real drama existed or not at the time of Patañjali, and Konow sets its appearance much later.

<p>The early evidence adduced for the existence of the shadow-drama is wholly unreliable. Professor Konow suggests that the term R&umacr;pa used in the fourth Rock Edict of Açoka, where he speaks of exhibiting spectacles of the dwellings of the gods, of elephants and bonfires, refers to a shadow device, in apparent ignorance of the true sense abundantly illustrated by the attested facts as to the mode of such representations in Buddhist literature;<note n=1 id=n54.1>See Vincent Smith, <hi>Asoka</hi>, (ed. 3), pp. 166 f.</note> he accepts the wholly absurd view that R&umacr;paka as a name of the drama is derived from such shadow projections, while in fact it obviously denotes the visible presentation, the normal and early sense of R&umacr;pa. Equally unfortunate is the effort to discover that the S&imacr;t&amacr;beng&amacr; cave<note n=2 id=n54.2>Bloch, <hi>Arch. Survey of India Report</hi>, 1903&ndash;4, pp. 123 ff.</note> shows signs of grooves in front, which might have served in connexion with the curtain necessary for a shadow play, and much more so is the effort to explain Nepathya, the name of the tiring-room behind the curtain in the Sanskrit drama, from a misunderstood Pr&amacr;krit <hi lang=sa-Latn>nevaccha</hi>, which in its turn might represent a Sanskrit <hi lang=sa-Latn>naip&amacr;&tdotb;hya</hi>&mdash;never found&mdash;denoting the place for the reader; apparently the shadows are in this view explained by some person behind the curtain. The philological combination is quite impossible.

<p>Pischel&apos;s evidence for the early existence of the shadow-drama is all of it without value. The term <hi lang=sa-Latn>ruppar&umacr;pakam</hi> occurs in v. 394 of the comparatively old <hi>Ther&imacr;g&amacr;th&amacr;</hi> of the Buddhist Canon, but it may indicate a puppet-play, and this is rendered very probable by the mention of a puppet only just before in the text; if not, it doubtless means, as taken by the commentator, a piece of jugglery, an art always loved in India; unfortunately the age of the text is uncertain, so that even for the puppet-play it gives no precise date. It is certain that <hi lang=sa-Latn>r&umacr;padakkha</hi>, a term used in the <hi>Milindapañha</hi><note n=3 id=n54.3>p. 344.</note>&mdash;a work of dubious date&mdash;has no such reference, nor <hi lang=sa-Latn>l&umacr;padakha</hi> in a cave at Jog&imacr;m&amacr;r&amacr;. To find <hi lang=sa-Latn>r&umacr;popaj&imacr;vana</hi> in the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;rata</hi> used in the sense of shadow-play <pb n=55 id=pb55 facs="f:055">is impossible; the explanation is given by N&imacr;laka&ndotb;&tdotb;ha,<note n=1 id=n55.1>xii. 295. 5.</note> and proves the existence in his time, the seventeenth century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi>, of the custom, but the term is used in close proximity with appearing on the stage (<hi lang=sa-Latn>ra&nmacr;g&amacr;vatara&ndotb;a</hi>), and there is conclusive evidence that the word refers to the deplorable immorality of the players, who actually have as a synonym in the lexicons the style of &lsquo;living by (the dishonour of) their wives (<hi lang=sa-Latn>j&amacr;y&amacr;j&imacr;va</hi>)&rsquo;. The same fact explains the term <hi lang=sa-Latn>r&umacr;popaj&imacr;vin</hi> used by Var&amacr;hamihira in the sixth century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> in proximity to painters, writers, and singers: the actor is essentially mercenary.<note n=2 id=n55.2><hi>B&rdotb;hatsa&mdota;hit&amacr;</hi>, v. 74; see Hillebrandt, ZDMG. lxxii. 227.</note> It is impossible to accept the suggestion that the Aindraj&amacr;likas, who appear working magic results in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, the <hi>Prabodhacandrodaya</hi>, and the P&umacr;rvap&imacr;&tdotb;hik&amacr; of the <hi>Daçakum&amacr;racarita</hi>, were really shadow-dramatists; Indian magicians are well known even at present, and the illusions which to some extent they produce have nothing whatever to do with shadow-plays. The scenes which the magician describes to the king in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi> were doubtless left to the imagination of the audience, just as was the apparent fire which burned the inner apartments and enveloped the princess. To believe in realism in these cases runs contrary to the stage directions of the play itself. From the name Çaubhika, with its Pr&amacr;krit equivalent Sobhiya, nothing whatever can be made out; the word has no relation to shadows and is never explained by any authority in that sense.

<p>We are left, therefore, with the evidence to be derived from the term Ch&amacr;y&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka, which is interpreted by Pischel as a &lsquo;shadow-drama&rsquo;, and is applied to several dramas, among which the oldest which can be dated with sufficient certainty is the <hi>D&umacr;t&amacr;&nmacr;gada</hi> of Subha&tdotb;a in the thirteenth century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> The exact meaning of the term is uncertain, as it might denote a &lsquo;drama in the state of a shadow&rsquo;, and this would accord perfectly with the <hi>D&umacr;t&amacr;&nmacr;gada</hi> itself. That such a drama was a shadow-drama is best supported by the <hi>Dharm&amacr;bhyudaya</hi> of Meghaprabh&amacr;c&amacr;rya,<note n=3 id=n55.3>ZDMG. lxxv. 69 f.</note> which is styled a Ch&amacr;y&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;yaprabandha, and in which a definite stage direction is found directing that, when the king expresses his intention to become an ascetic, a puppet is to be placed inside the curtain in the attire of an ascetic. But the <pb n=56 id=pb56 facs="f:056">date of this play is uncertain, and it is extremely difficult to argue with any certainty from it to the <hi>D&umacr;t&amacr;&nmacr;gada</hi>; why, it is inevitable to ask, should the latter play contain no stage direction of this kind? We know that the shadow-drama arose in some part of India, for N&imacr;laka&ndotb;&tdotb;ha recognizes it, but we have no evidence that it existed at the time of the <hi>D&umacr;t&amacr;&nmacr;gada</hi>.

<p>Whatever judgement be passed on this view,<note n=1 id=n56.1>See ch. xi, § 8 below.</note> and the matter must be left undecided in the absence of any effective evidence, it is wholly impossible to accept the argument of Professor Lüders which would take the <hi>D&umacr;t&amacr;&nmacr;gada</hi> as the type of Ch&amacr;y&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka, and thence deduce that the <hi>Mah&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi> and the <hi>Harid&umacr;ta</hi> are shadow-dramas. The one <hi>Ch&amacr;y&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;ya</hi> which we know to have been a shadow-drama in fact is an ordinary play without kinship to the <hi>D&umacr;t&amacr;&nmacr;gada</hi>, and the same remark applies to the other dramas known to us which are styled Ch&amacr;y&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;akas. There are, however, points of similarity between the <hi>D&umacr;t&amacr;&nmacr;gada</hi> and the <hi>Mah&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>; the prevalence of verse, often epic in character, over prose, the absence of Pr&amacr;krit, the large number of characters, and the omission of the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, which explain themselves easily in the latter case by the assumption that we have literary drama before us, a play never intended to be acted. The conviction is strengthened by the shameless plagiarisms of the plays from earlier R&amacr;ma dramas. In any case, however, we are dealing with the late developments of the Sanskrit drama, and it is clear that nothing can be gained from any assumption of a part played by the shadow-play in the evolution of the Sanskrit drama. Even on Professor Lüders&apos;s own interpretation of the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi>, all that is requisite is dumb players, and this form of drama is attested for India in modern times.

<p>That the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra and Sth&amacr;paka derive their names from manipulating the puppets for either the puppet- or the shadow-drama is a suggestion which, though recently repeated by Dr. Hultzsch, cannot be regarded as plausible.<note n=2 id=n56.2>See ch. xiv, § 2 below.</note> The term Sth&amacr;paka is colourless, and may merely denote &lsquo;performer&rsquo;; if it comes from the puppet-play, it is difficult to see why such a person was needed beside the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra, who moved the strings. Moreover, the theory recognizes the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra clearly <pb n=57 id=pb57 facs="f:057">as the man who lays out the temporary playhouse needed for the exhibition, and this sense passes easily over into that of director; this derivation is preferable on the whole to the other, accepted by Professor Hillebrandt,<note n=1 id=n57.1>AID. p. 8, n. 2. On Javan drama, cf. Ridgeway, <hi>Dramas, &amp;c.</hi>, pp. 216 ff.</note> which would make him the man who knows the rules of his art.

<p>The shadow-play, we have seen, cannot have influenced the progress of the early drama, and we may, therefore, leave aside the question whether it does not essentially presuppose the drama, as Professor Hillebrandt contends; the parallel from Java adduced to refute this opinion is clearly wholly inadequate, unless and until it can be proved that the shadow play sprang up in Java without any previous knowledge of real drama.


<div2 id=ch2.5 n=5>
<head><ab type=divNum>5.</ab> <hi>Greek Influence on the Sanskrit Drama</hi></head>

<p>It is undoubtedly a matter far from easy for any people to create from materials such as existed in India a true drama, and it was a perfectly legitimate suggestion of Weber&apos;s<note n=2 id=n57.2>IS. ii. 148; <hi>Ind. Lit.</hi><hi rend=sup>2</hi> n. 210; SBAW. 1890, p. 920; cf. IS. xiii. 492.</note> that the necessary impetus to creation may have been given by the contact of Greece with India, through the representation of Greek plays at the courts of the kings in Baktria, the Punjab, and Gujar&amacr;t, who brought with them Greek culture as well as Greek forces. This view suffered modification in view of further consideration of the evidence of an Indian drama in the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi>, and the final opinion of Weber was content with the view that a certain influence might have been exerted by the Greek on the Sanskrit drama. The vehement repudiation of this opinion by Pischel<note n=3 id=n57.3><hi lang=de>Die Recensionen der Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> (1875), p. 19; SBAW. 1906, p. 502.</note> was followed by the elaborate effort of Windisch<note n=4 id=n57.4><hi lang=de>Der griechische Einfluss im indischen Drama</hi> (1882); <hi>Sansk. Phil.</hi> pp. 398 ff. Cf. E. Brandes, <hi>Lervognen</hi> (1870), pp. iii ff.; Vincent Smith, JASB. lviii. 1. 184 ff.</note> to trace the extent of the influence which he believed he could establish. Windisch&apos;s attitude is of special importance because he recognizes fully the elements which made for the development of an independent Indian drama, the epic recitations and the mimetic art of the Na&tdotb;a, whose name indicated, as a Pr&amacr;kritism of the root <hi lang=sa-Latn>n&rdotb;t</hi>, dance, that he was at first a dancer, in the Indian sense of the term, that is one who represents by <pb n=58 id=pb58 facs="f:058">his postures and gestures emotions of varied kinds, or, in the terminology of the Greek and Roman stage, a pantomime. But he insists on the distinction between the dramatization of the epic material suggested by the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi>, and the features of the classical form of the drama. The subject-matter differs, heroic and mythic figures are presented in the relations of everyday life, the chief theme is a comedy of love, the plot is artistically developed and the action divided into scenes, character types are developed, the epic element recedes before the development of dialogue, verse is mingled with prose, Sanskrit with Pr&amacr;krit. The change is remarkable; was it aided by the influence of the Greek drama? Admittedly on any theory we must allow for powerful causes to produce so splendid a development, and it would be idle to ignore the possibility of such influence.

<p>Since Windisch wrote, the extent of Greek influence on India before and after the Christian era has been the subject of much investigation, which has yielded its richest fruits in the sphere of art. That India borrowed the incitement to the art of Gandh&amacr;ra from Greece as its ultimate source is undeniable, and it is equally clear that the Buddhist adoption of the practice of depicting the human form of the Buddha, in lieu of merely indicating his presence by some symbol such as his seat, was due to Greek artistic influences. The extent to which the rise of the Mah&amacr;y&amacr;na school of Buddhism was furthered by the influx of religious and philosophical ideas from the west is still uncertain; but it is noteworthy that Professor Lévi,<note n=1 id=n58.1><hi>Mah&amacr;y&amacr;nas&umacr;tr&amacr;la&mdota;k&amacr;ra</hi>, ii. 16 f. Cf. Keith, <hi>Buddhist Philosophy</hi>, p. 217.</note> who most strongly opposed the theory of Windisch, has himself attributed to western influences the development of the new spirit in Buddhism which he traces in Açvagho&sdotb;a, whom he places in the entourage of Kani&sdotb;ka, dating the former in the first century <hi rend=asc>B.C.</hi> If this were the case, there would be decided difficulties in maintaining any chronological objections such as Professor Lévi<note n=2 id=n58.2>TI. i. 345.</note> originally urged to the theory of Windisch; when he attacked that theory he could place the earliest Sanskrit dramas preserved, those of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa in his view, five or six centuries <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> But now we have dramas of about <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 100 which are certainly not the earliest of their <pb n=59 id=pb59 facs="f:059">type, and it is impossible to deny that the Sanskrit drama came into being during the period when Greek influence was present in India. The highest point of that influence politically was doubtless attained under Menander; in the middle of the first century <hi rend=asc>B.C.</hi>, roughly a century after Menander&apos;s conquests, the Greek princes were on the verge of being absorbed by new influences culminating in the establishment of the Ku&sdotb;ana<note n=1 id=n59.1>Or Ku&sdotb;&amacr;&ndotb;a; CHI. i. 580 ff.</note> domination, but there is nothing chronologically difficult in assuming the influence of Greek drama on the drama in India.

<p>The question, however, arises how far there was actual presentation at the courts of Greek princes in India of dramatic entertainments. On this topic the evidence is no doubt scanty.<note n=2 id=n59.2>Plutarch, <hi>Alex.</hi> 72; <hi>Fort. Alex.</hi> 128 D; <hi>Crassus</hi>, 33. Marshall (JRAS. 1909, pp. 1060 f.) suggests a reproduction of a motif of the <hi>Antigone</hi> in a vase at Peshawar, but dubiously.</note> We know indeed that Alexander was fond of theatrical spectacles with which he amused himself in the intervals allowed by his victories, and we hear that at Ekbatana there were no fewer than three thousand Greek artists who had come from Greece. We are told also that the children of the Persians, the Gedrosians and the people of Susa, sang the dramas of Euripides and Sophokles; if we are to believe Philostratos&apos;s Life of Apollonios of Tyana,<note n=3 id=n59.3>ii. 32.</note> a Brahmin boasted that he had read the <hi>Herakleidai</hi> of Euripides, and Plutarch has described in inimitable fashion the strange scene at the court of Orodes of Parthia when the messenger arrived, bearing the head of Crassus, and the actor Iason substituted the ghastly relic for the head of Pentheus in the <hi>Bakchai</hi>, which he was then performing. We need not doubt from these and other passages the existence of performances of Greek dramas throughout the provinces which formed the Empire of Alexander; the scepticism of Professor Lévi<note n=4 id=n59.4>TI. ii. 60.</note> in this regard is clearly inadmissible. It is perfectly true that of dramatic performances in India we have no express mention, but in view of the miserably scanty information we possess regarding these principalities of the Greeks in India there is nothing surprising in the fact. Nor is it likely that princes who could employ artists of sufficient ability to produce <pb n=60 id=pb60 facs="f:060">beautiful coins would be indifferent to what is after all the greatest literary creation of Greece.

<p>Nor can we lay much stress on the difficulty of India borrowing anything from the Greek drama, owing to the great difference between the two civilizations, Indian exclusiveness, Indian ignorance of foreign languages, or similar general considerations, because we have really no evidence of value of the feelings and actions of the Indians during the period when the Greek invasion was only the forerunner of invasions by Parthians, Çakas, and Ku&sdotb;anas, followed by other less famous but not unimportant immigrants, whose advent vitally affected the population and civilization of the north-west of India. It is plain that in the Gupta dynasty of the fourth century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> we find a great Hindu revival, but a revival which evidently drew strength primarily from the east, and we do not know anything definite to enable us to reason <hi lang=la>a priori</hi> on what was, or was not, possible as regards assimilation of the drama. The only decisive evidence possible is that of the actual plays, and unfortunately the results to be attained by examination of them are not at all satisfactory.

<p>It is held by Windisch that the New Attic Comedy, which flourished from 340&ndash;260 <hi rend=asc>B.C.</hi>, must be deemed the source of influence on Indian drama; the fact that no mention of this comedy is specifically made in the few notices we have of drama in the east is doubtless not of importance. On the other hand, we know that Alexandria under the Lagidai became a great centre of Greek learning, and that between Alexandria and Ujjayin&imacr; through the port of Barygaza<note n=1 id=n60.1><hi>Periplus</hi>, 48.</note> there was a brisk exchange of trade which may have aided in intellectual contact,<note n=2 id=n60.2>Cf. Hultzsch, JRAS. 1904, pp. 399 ff. on the Kanarese words found in a fragment of a Greek comedy preserved in a papyrus of the second century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi></note> perhaps especially in the period when Menander&apos;s conquests gave Greek products of every sort a special vogue. The new comedy by its making its subject of the everyday life of man was far more suited than any other form of drama to attract imitation.

<p>The actual points of contact between the New Comedy and the Sanskrit drama are, however, scanty. The division of both the Roman drama<note n=3 id=n60.3>This does not appear in the dramas of Menander so far as recovered, and is of uncertain date. Cf. Donatus on Terence, <hi>Andria</hi>, Prol.</note> and the Sanskrit into acts, distinguished by <pb n=61 id=pb61 facs="f:061">the departure of all the actors from the stage and the number of five as normal, though often exceeded in India, are facts which need not be more than casual coincidences: the divisions in the Sanskrit drama rest on an analysis of the action which is not recorded in Greece or Rome. There is similarity in the scenic conventions, in the asides, in the entry and exit of characters, more notably in the practice that the advent of a new character is usually expressly notified to the audience by a remark from one of the actors already on the stage. But these are all matters which must almost inevitably coincide in theatrical performances produced under approximately similar conditions. Even in the modern theatre with its programmes the necessity of indicating at once the identity of the new comers to the stage is keenly felt.

<p>More value attaches to the argument from the use of Yavanik&amacr;,<note n=1 id=n61.1>Konow, ID. p. 5, n. 5; Lévi, TI. i. 348; for the generic sense, cf. Amara, ii. 6. 3. 22; Hal&amacr;yudha, ii. 154.</note> or its Pr&amacr;krit form Javanik&amacr;, for the name of the curtain which covered the tiring room and formed the background of the stage. The word primarily is an adjective meaning Ionian, the Greeks with whom India first came into contact. But it was not confined to what was Greek in the strict sense of the word; it applies to anything connected with the Hellenized Persian Empire, Egypt, Syria, Bactria, and it therefore cannot be rigidly limited to what is Greek. As applied to the curtain it is an adjective, and describes doubtless the material of the curtain (<hi lang=sa-Latn>pa&tdotb;&imacr;</hi>, <hi lang=sa-Latn>apa&tdotb;&imacr;</hi>) as foreign, possibly as Lévi suggests, Persian tapestry brought to India by Greek ships and merchants. The word Yavanik&amacr; has no special application to the curtain of the theatre, as would be the case, if it were borrowed as a detail of stage arrangement from Greece. Nor in fact was there any curtain in the case of Greek drama, so far as is known, from which it could be borrowed; Windisch&apos;s contention merely was that the curtain was called Greek because it took the place of the painted scenery at the back of the Greek stage.

<p>As little can any conclusion of Greek borrowing be drawn from the Yavan&imacr;s, Greek maidens, who are represented as among the body-guard of the king;<note n=2 id=n61.2>Already in Bh&amacr;sa: cf. Lindenau, BS. p. 41, n. 2; Lévi, <hi lang=la>Quid de Graecis, &amp;c.</hi> <pb n=62 id=pb62n facs="f:062">(1890), pp. 41 f.; on Greek influence, cf. Kennedy, JRAS. 1912, pp. 993 ff., 1012 ff.; 1913, pp. 121 ff.; W. E. Clark, <hi>Classical Philology</hi>, xiv. 311 ff.; xv. 10 f., 18 f.; Weber, SBAW. 1890, pp. 900 ff.</note> for this the Greek drama offers no <pb n=62 id=pb62 facs="f:062">parallel; it represents the fondness of the princes of India<note n=1 id=n62.1><hi>Kau&tdotb;il&imacr;ya Arthaç&amacr;stra</hi>, i. 21; Megasthenes, frag. 26; Strabo, xv. 1. 55.</note> for the fascinating hetaerae of Greece, and the readiness of Greek traders to make the high profits to be derived from shipping these youthful cargoes.

<p>The points of resemblance in regard to the plot are of interest. There is some similarity between the stock theme of the N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;, the love of a king for a maiden, hindered by various obstacles, and finally successful through events which reveal her as a princess, destined for him in marriage but concealed in this aspect by some accident, and the New Comedy picture of the youth whose affection for a fair lady, apparently of status which forbids marriage by Attic law, but in reality of equal birth, is finally rewarded by the discovery of the mark which leads to her identification. The use of a mark of recognition is undoubtedly common in both dramas. We have in the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> the ring<note n=2 id=n62.2>For this motif cf. Gawro&nacute;ski, <hi lang=fr>Les Sources de quelques drames indiens</hi>, pp. 39 ff. On recognition in the Greek tragic drama see Aristotle, <hi>Poetics</hi>, 1452 <hi>a</hi> 29 ff.; Verrall, <hi>Choephorae</hi>, pp. xxxiii&ndash;lxx. Its alleged essential character as an element of primitive tragedy, the recognition of the god, is disposed of by Ridgeway, <hi>Dramas, &amp;c.</hi>, pp. 40 f.</note> which gives part of the title of the play <hi>Abhijñ&amacr;na-Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, and in the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi> the stone of reunion (<hi lang=sa-Latn>sa&mdota;gamama&ndotb;i</hi>) which enables Pur&umacr;ravas to recognise his beloved despite her change into a creeper. In the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi> we have the necklace which <corr sic=permitsthe>permits the</corr> identification of the heroine; in the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi>, the jewel which, falling from the sky, denotes the fate of the prince; in the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi> the garland plucked by M&amacr;dhava, worn by M&amacr;lat&imacr;, which Saud&amacr;min&imacr; produces at the dénouement as a sign of recognition; and in the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> the clay cart in which are placed the jewels used as evidence against the hero. In the same general category fall the ring of the queen in the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi>, which the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka obtains from her in order to cure a snake-bite, and employs to bring about the release of M&amacr;lavik&amacr;; the arrow of &Amacr;yus, in the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>, which reveals to Pur&umacr;ravas his son; and the seal of R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa in the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi> of which C&amacr;&ndotb;akya makes use to confound his schemes. In <pb n=63 id=pb63 facs="f:063">some cases the similarity of use of these emblems is close; M&amacr;lavik&amacr;, taken away by brigands, and Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;, rescued from the sea, are real parallels to the heroine of the <hi>Rudens</hi>, stolen from her father by a brigand, sold to a <hi>leno</hi> and wrecked on the Sicilian coast, whose recognition is brought about by the discovery of her childish ornaments.

<p>These are striking facts, and the only way to meet them is to show that the motifs in Sanskrit drama have an earlier history in the literature, and can, therefore, be regarded as natural developments. The difficulty presented here is that the literature available consists either of tales, which in any form available to us are later than the period of the supposed Greek influence, or the epic which is of uncertain date, so that no strict proof is available that any of its minor issues antedates the Christian era. But we do find in the epic indications that it was not necessary for Greece to give to India the ideas presented in the drama. The story of the love of K&imacr;caka for Draupad&imacr;, when disguised as handmaiden she served Sude&sdotb;&ndotb;&amacr;, wife of the king Vir&amacr;&tdotb;a, has a tragic outcome, for his love is repulsed, but it has undoubted affinities with the plot of the N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;. In the case of the old tale of Nala and Damayant&imacr;, the heroine is more happy, for, when separated from her husband who has abandoned her in the distraction of losing his kingdom at dice, she lives in peace, guarded securely from interference; at last she is recognized by a birthmark. In the <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> the use of signs of this sort is extended to artificial modes: S&imacr;t&amacr;, stolen away from R&amacr;ma, drops her jewels to the ground; the monkeys bear them to their king, who hands them to R&amacr;ma, and the hero thus knows beyond a peradventure the identity of the ravisher. To console her in her detention pending his efforts at rescue he sends Hanumant to her, bearing his messages, and gives him his ring to serve to identify him; S&imacr;t&amacr; sees it and takes heart. We may admit that such incidents are almost inevitable in a primitive society, in which the means of identification were necessarily material, or personal. Nor in the Sanskrit drama is there any preponderant use of this factor; the letter and the portrait<note n=1 id=n63.1>Cf. Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s <hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi>, vi. pp. 51 ff.</note> are other means, the use of which is recognized in the theory.

<p>The evidence of borrowing based on the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> by <pb n=64 id=pb64 facs="f:064">Windisch requires reconsideration in the light of the facts now known regarding the authority of that drama for the early Sanskrit drama. To Windisch it seemed to present every appearance of an early age, and to show close relations to a Greek model. The title he compared with the <hi>Cistellaria</hi>, &lsquo;little chest&rsquo;, or the <hi>Aulularia</hi>, &lsquo;little pot&rsquo;; the mixture of a political intrigue and a love drama with the mention&mdash;only incidental however&mdash;of political events contemporaneous with the action in Plautus&apos;s <hi>Epidicus</hi> and <hi>Captivi</hi>; the court scene he held to be of Greek inspiration; the meeting of C&amacr;rudatta and Vasantasen&amacr; he compared with that of the hero and heroine of the <hi>Cistellaria</hi>; the theft of Çarvilaka, in order to buy the freedom of the slave girl he loves, to the dishonest means adopted by the hero in the new comedy to procure means to purchase his inamorata; the setting free of the slave by Vasantasen&amacr; with the attaining of the position of a freedwoman in the Greek drama; finally the elevation of Vasantasen&amacr; to the rank of a woman of good character to permit of her legal marriage to C&amacr;rudatta is compared with the discovery in the Greek drama of the existence of a free status as the birthright of the maiden whom the hero loves. The <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, however, is not an early representative of the Indian drama in the sense held by Windisch; it is based on the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi> of Bh&amacr;sa, in which there is no mingling of the political and love intrigue, at any rate as we have that play; the title <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, which departs from the usual model, was probably deliberately chosen to distinguish the new drama from the old. The plays cited have no real combination of political and love intrigues, and the other parallels are far too vague to be taken seriously. The raising of Vasantasen&amacr; to a new status is an extraordinary event, which is dependent on an action of the new king &Amacr;ryaka, who, as an overthrower of the former monarch, exercises the supreme right of sovereignty in favour of the lady, in defiance of the rules of caste. The political intrigue thus becomes a vital element in the play.

<p>Nor can any special value be ascribed to the rule, which is laid down in the theory, and observed in practice, and which confines the events in an act to the limits of a single day, as compared with the rule of Aristotle<note n=1 id=n64.1><hi>Poetics</hi>, 1449 <hi>b</hi> 12 ff.</note> that the events of a drama should not <pb n=65 id=pb65 facs="f:065">exceed, or only by a little, the duration of a day. If the rule was borrowed, it was greatly changed in sense by permitting long periods, up to a year, to elapse between the acts in the Sanskrit drama, and the mere moral needs of the approximation to reality requisite for illusion would produce the state of the Sanskrit drama without external influence.

<p>The characters of the drama present problems which are not solved by the theory of borrowing. The figure of the queen, loving her husband, noble and dignified, is compared by Windisch with that of the <hi>matrona</hi> of the Roman comedy, while her attempts to prevent the union of her husband and the new love are compared to the efforts of the <hi>senex</hi> to dissuade his son from a rash marriage or intrigue. But it is clear that the comparisons are idle; the rivalry of the old love and the new is an incident of the life of the harem inevitable in polygamy, while it affords an admirable opportunity for the poet to depict the contrast of types and the different aspects of love, his chief theme. Windisch, however, lays most stress on his comparison of the three figures of the Vi&tdotb;a, Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, and Çak&amacr;ra, with the parasite, the <hi lang=la>servus currens</hi>, and the <hi lang=la>miles gloriosus</hi> of the Greek drama, and his arguments have a certain weight. It is true that these three, with the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra and his assistant, are given by the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> in a list of actors, and that the five correspond fairly closely with the male personnel of a Greek drama; it is also true that, while K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa and the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> with the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi> know the Çak&amacr;ra, he vanishes from the later drama, and the Vi&tdotb;a shows comparatively little life, suggesting that the Greek borrowings were gradually felt unsuited to India and died a natural death. But the argument is inadequate to prove borrowing. The Vi&tdotb;a is, indeed, more closely akin to the parasite than to any other character of the Greek or Roman comedy, but the parasite is lacking in the refinement and culture of his Indian counterpart, who is clearly drawn from life, the witty and accomplished companion who is paid to amuse his patron, but whose dependence does not make him the object of insolence and bad jokes. The Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka has, in all likelihood, as has been seen, his origin in the religious drama; his Brahmin caste, and his use of Pr&amacr;krit can best thus be explained. The alternative views all present far more difficulties; the transformance of the slave into a Brahmin <pb n=66 id=pb66 facs="f:066">is far too violent a change to be credible, while Lévi&apos;s<note n=1 id=n66.1>TI. i. 358.</note> view which makes him a borrowing from the Pr&amacr;krit drama, which depicted with truth the type of Brahmin who serves as go-between in love affairs, masking his degraded trade under the cloak of religion, renders it unintelligible why the Brahmins should have consented to maintain him in the Sanskrit drama. Equally unconvincing is Professor Konow&apos;s<note n=2 id=n66.2>ID. p. 15.</note> effort to explain him as a figure of the popular drama, which loved to make fun of the higher classes, especially the Brahmins. There was no conceivable reason why the Brahmins should have kept such a figure in a drama which never appealed to the lower classes, and it is significant that there is no trace of a comic figure of the K&sdotb;atriya class, although the populace doubtless was as willing to make fun of the rulers as of the priests. The similarity between the Çak&amacr;ra and the <hi lang=la>miles gloriosus</hi> is by no means small, but the argument from borrowing is refuted by the reflexion that such a figure can be explained perfectly easily from the actual life of India in the period of Bh&amacr;sa and the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, when mercenary soldiers must have been painfully familiar to Indians.

<p>The number of actors is certainly not in accord with the Greek practice; not only has Bh&amacr;sa large numbers, but the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> has thirty, the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> twenty-nine, the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi> eighteen, the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi> twenty-four, and it is only in the later and less inventive Bhavabh&umacr;ti that we find but thirteen in the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi> and eleven in the <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi>.

<p>The prologue in both dramas serves the purpose of announcing the author&apos;s name, the title of the play, and the desire of the dramatist for a sympathetic reception, but the Indian prologue is closely attached to the preliminaries, and has a definite and independent character of its own in the conversation between the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra and his wife, the chief actress, so that borrowing is out of the question. Nor does any importance attach to the fact that Çiva, who is in a special sense the patron of drama, is the nearest Indian representative of Dionysos, or that the time of the festival at which plays were often shown was spring, as in the case of the Great Dionysia at Athens when new plays were usually presented. There is similarity between the Protagonist and the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra, for both undertake the leading parts in the drama, <pb n=67 id=pb67 facs="f:067">but this and other minor points such as can be adduced are of no value as proofs of historical connexion.

<p>Windisch admitted that in regard to the theatrical buildings there was no possibility of comparison, as the Indian theatre was not permanent, but Bloch<note n=1 id=n67.1><hi>Arch. Survey of India Report</hi>, 1903&ndash;4, pp. 123 ff., rashly followed by Lüders, ZDMG. lviii. 868. See Hillebrandt, AID. pp. 23 f.; GIL. iii. 175, n. 1.</note> has endeavoured to show that the S&imacr;t&amacr;beng&amacr; cave theatre has marked affinities to the Greek. The attempt, however, is clearly a failure; the construction of the whole is merely that of a small amphitheatre cut out in the rock for a small audience without any special similarity to the Greek theatre of any period.

<p>More recently the tendency of those who seek to find Greek influence in the making of the Sanskrit drama has turned to the mime as the form of art which exercised influence on India, and the older arguments of Windisch have been given a new shape and in part strengthened in this regard.<note n=2 id=n67.2><hi lang=de>Der Mimus</hi>, i. 694 ff.; DLZ. 1915, pp. 589 ff.; E. Müller-Hess, <hi lang=de>Die Entstehung des indischen Dramas</hi> (1916), pp. 17 ff.; Lindenau, <hi lang=de>Festschrift Windisch</hi><corr sic=.>,</corr> p. 41.</note> The mime was performed without masks and buskins, as was the Indian drama. Moreover the mime, at any rate in Roman hands, had a curtain (<hi lang=la>siparium</hi>), which may be compared with the curtain of India. There was also no scene painting in the mime; different dialects were used, and the number of actors was considerable. Further, some of the standing types of the mime may be paralleled in the Indian drama; the z&emacr;lotypos has some similarity to the Çak&amacr;ra, the m&omacr;kos to the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka.

<p>Some of the arguments adduced against this theory of Reich&apos;s are admittedly untenable. It is impossible to argue as does Professor Konow that the use of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> as a work of early date is a mistake, since the oldest dramas preserved are of quite another type and have no similarity with Greek works. True, the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> is not as old as it was thought, but the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi> can be substituted in lieu, and there are no dramas older than it, save those of the same author and some fragments of Buddhist drama. Nor have we any very satisfactory evidence of a mime in India at an early date, for a mime means a great deal more than the mere work of a Na&tdotb;a. But there are adequate grounds for disregarding the theory. The similarity of types is not at all convincing; the borrowing of the idea of using <pb n=68 id=pb68 facs="f:068">different dialects from the mime is really absurd, and the large number of actors is equally natural in either case. The argument from the curtain is wholly without probative power; as we have seen, the term Yavanik&amacr; refers to material only; it would be very remarkable that the term Greek should be confined to the curtain alone, if the stage were really a Greek borrowing, and, last not least, we have no proof that the Greek mime had the curtain. The new form of the theory must, therefore, claim no more credence than the old. We cannot assuredly deny<note n=1 id=n68.1>Cf. Oldenberg, <hi lang=de>Die Literatur des alten Indien</hi>, pp. 241 ff.</note> the possibility of Greek influence, in the sense that Weber admitted the probability; the drama, or the mime, may, as played at Greek courts, have aided in the development of a true drama, but the evidence leaves only a negative answer to the search for positive signs of influence.

<p>There are, undoubtedly, certain considerations which <hi lang=la>a priori</hi> tell against borrowing; to judge from the Roman borrowings from Greece and those of France from the classics, the trace of imitation if it were real would be clear and emphatic. But we can hardly place very great faith in arguments from analogy; India has a strange genius for converting what it borrows and assimilating it, as it did in the case of the image of the Buddha which it fabricated from Greek models. More important is the possibility of tracing the sources of the dramas in the epic and the tales, though here the difficulty of dates prevents the demonstration being complete. The epic and undramatic character of the Sanskrit drama is true enough, but not universally applicable, and the argument is liable to be turned by adopting the view that only Greek influence is contended for, not the exclusion of Indian native influences. The typical nature of the characters, adduced by Professor Konow as a point of difference, seems to indicate a forgetfulness that the Greek drama, and especially the New Comedy, is rich in types, and that the mime depicts types. Nor in that comedy do we find any particularly effective heightening of interest or development of the situation from the characters of the persons, or solutions produced without recourse to cutting the knot by artificial means. In all these matters indeed the Indian drama rather is akin to the Greek than otherwise.



<pb n=69 id=pb69 facs="f:069">
<div2 id=ch2.6 n=6>
<head><ab type=divNum>6.</ab> <hi>The Çakas and the Sanskrit Drama</hi></head>

<p>Professor <corr sic=Levi>Lévi</corr>,<note n=1 id=n69.1>JA. sér. 9, xix. 95 ff.; IA. xxxiii. 163 ff. Cf. Bloch, <hi lang=fr>Mélanges Lévi</hi>, pp. 15 f.; Franke, <hi lang=de>P&amacr;li und Sanskrit</hi>, pp. 87 ff.; Keith, <hi>Sansk. Lit.</hi> ch. 1.</note> whose opposition to Windisch regarding the possibility of Greek influence on the Indian drama has been noted, is himself responsible for the suggestion that the rise of the Sanskrit drama, as opposed to the more popular religious drama in Pr&amacr;krit, is to be attributed to the Çakas, whose advent to India was one of the causes of the rapid decadence of the Greek principalities in the <corr sic="north west">north-west</corr>. The theory is based on a general view of the elevation of Sanskrit to the rank of the language of literature, as opposed to its restriction to use as the learned and sacred language of the Brahmins. The inscriptions, on the whole, show that Sanskrit as an epigraphic language was introduced by Rudrad&amacr;man whose Girn&amacr;r inscription of <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 150 is wholly in Sanskrit, though Sanskrit appears in part in U&sdotb;avad&amacr;ta&apos;s inscription of <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 124. The Western K&sdotb;atrapas, of Çaka origin, were, he holds, the first to bring Sanskrit down to earth, while not vulgarizing it, as contrasted with the Hindu and orthodox Ç&amacr;takar&ndotb;is of the Deccan who retained Pr&amacr;krit in their inscriptions down to the third century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> The character of the Çak&amacr;ra may be regarded in this light; in its hostility to the Çakas it reveals a period when either a prince was opposed to the Çaka rule, or the Çaka dominion had just fallen and was fresh in the minds of the people. The <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> may retain a confused version of the events of the second century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> A specific connexion between the Çakas and the creation of drama may be seen in the terminology of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, and that of their inscriptions. Rudrad&amacr;man refers to his grandfather Ca&sdotb;&tdotb;ana as Sv&amacr;min and Sug&rdotb;h&imacr;tan&amacr;man, and Sv&amacr;min is freely used in the epigraphic records of the kings of the line from Nahap&amacr;na (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 78) onwards. Further Rudrasena in <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 205, in referring to his royal ancestors, Ca&sdotb;&tdotb;ana, Jayad&amacr;man, Rudrad&amacr;man, and Rudrasena, gives them the epithet of Bhadramukha, &lsquo;of gracious countenance&rsquo;. These terms, Lévi argues, correspond with the use laid down in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, which must have borrowed from contemporary official usage. Further, Rudrad&amacr;man uses the term R&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;riya as applying to Pu&sdotb;yagupta, who under <pb n=70 id=pb70 facs="f:070">Candragupta, the Maurya, some four and a half centuries earlier established the reservoir which he had repaired, and this term occurs in the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> and the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> in the sense of brother-in-law of the king, the sense given to it in the <hi><corr sic=Amarakosa>Amarakoça</corr></hi>, the earliest Sanskrit lexicon of established authority. To these considerations may be added that Ujjayin&imacr;, the capital of the Western K&sdotb;atrapas of M&amacr;lava, is a centre, round which as a fan radiate the three great literary Pr&amacr;krits of the drama, Çaurasen&imacr;, M&amacr;gadh&imacr;, and M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr;, thus accounting for their use, which else would be difficult to explain.

<p>Lévi&apos;s suggestion, which was accompanied by an admission that the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> or its source was older than he had formerly argued, and that the possibility of Greek influence was thus increased, has been accepted by Professor Konow<note n=1 id=n70.1>ID. p. 49.</note> with the important modification that in face of the fact that the oldest dramas known to us, the fragments of Açvagho&sdotb;a and those of Bh&amacr;sa, ignore M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr; and that Çaurasen&imacr; is the normal prose tongue, he accepts Mathur&amacr; as the home of the drama, and ascribes it to about the middle of the first century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> This view he supports by the fact that the rulers of Mathur&amacr; were also Çaka K&sdotb;atrapas, or Satraps, whose control extends back at least to the beginning of the first century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi>

<p>It may be feared that neither theory will stand critical investigation, however tempting it may be to obtain an exact date for the Sanskrit drama. The discovery of Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s fragments shows that the drama has already attained a very definite and complete form, and we really cannot with any probability assume that the creation of drama preceded this by no more than a century. Even a century, however, brings us further back than the middle of the first century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi>, for Konow&apos;s date of Kani&sdotb;ka, about <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 150,<note n=2 id=n70.2>ID. p. 50. Contrast CHI. i. 583.</note> is probably considerably too late, and should be placed fifty years earlier at least. We are thus separated from Rudrad&amacr;man by a period of 150 years, probably more, and the theory that the Western K&sdotb;atrapas introduced Sanskrit into the drama falls hopelessly to the ground on chronological considerations alone.

<p>The argument from the use of technical terms is clearly untenable. That R&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;riya in Rudrad&amacr;man&apos;s inscription has the sense <pb n=71 id=pb71 facs="f:071">of &lsquo;brother-in-law&rsquo; is not supported by the slightest evidence, and is most improbable; the term doubtless denotes governor, and the restricted use is a later development. The use of Sv&amacr;min as the mode of addressing the king is not recorded in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, and to argue that it, being given in the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi> and the <hi>S&amacr;hityadarpa&ndotb;a</hi>, must be borrowed from Bharata, as Konow does, is quite impossible. On the contrary, Bharata<note n=1 id=n71.1>xvii. 75; cf. <hi>S&amacr;hityadarpa&ndotb;a</hi>, 431; R. iii. 314.</note> gives the style to the Yuvar&amacr;ja, or Crown Prince, presumably as distinct from the king. In the extant dramas after Bh&amacr;sa it is not used of the king or Crown Prince. Sug&rdotb;h&imacr;tan&amacr;man, denoting perhaps &lsquo;whose name is uttered with respect&rsquo;, has no parallel in Bharata; only in the later theory do we find Sug&rdotb;h&imacr;t&amacr;bhidha, which, however, is prescribed merely for the address of a pupil, child, or younger brother to a teacher, father, or elder brother, and therefore stands in no conceivable relation to the term used by Rudrad&amacr;man. Bhadramukha is the address to a royal prince in Bharata; it is used of kings by Rudrasena, and the literature ignores the specific or royal use. The lack of accord is complete and convincing; if the drama had originated under the Western K&sdotb;atrapas of Ujjayin&imacr;, it would not have been so flagrantly out of harmony with the official language.

<p>The whole error of these arguments rests in the belief that the drama developed as a Pr&amacr;krit drama before it was turned into Sanskrit. The same theory has been applied to every department of secular Sanskrit literature without either plausibility or success; the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi> knows Sanskrit K&amacr;vya before any Pr&amacr;krit K&amacr;vya is recorded.<note n=2 id=n71.2>Cf. IS. xiii. 483 ff.; Kielhorn, IA. xiv. 326 f.</note> But, apart from this, it is essential to remember that the drama was religious in origin and essentially connected with epic recitations, and that for both reasons Sanskrit claimed in it a rightful place from the inception. It is certain that the recitations known by Patañjali were in Sanskrit, and it is difficult in the extreme to understand how in the view of Lévi and Konow a Pr&amacr;krit drama proper ever came into being. Before the coalescence of the epic recitation and the primitive mime believed in by Konow, there cannot have been any drama on his own theory; when they coalesced, Sanskrit must have from the first been present.

<pb n=72 id=pb72 facs="f:072"><p>The discovery of Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s fragments undoubtedly helps greatly to bring the creation of the drama very close up to the time of Patañjali, if not to that date. The first century <hi rend=asc>B.C.</hi> can with fair certainty be assumed to be the very latest period at which the appearance of a genuine Sanskrit drama can be placed. If indeed Professor Lüders&apos;s former date for Kani&sdotb;ka were correct and he were the founder of the Vikrama era of 57 <hi rend=asc>B.C.</hi>,<note n=1 id=n72.1><hi lang=de>Bruchstücke buddhistischer Dramen</hi>, pp. 11, 64. Contrast his views in SBAW. 1912, pp. 808 ff., when he accepts the much later date, advocated by Oldenberg, GN. 1911, pp. 427 ff.</note> then the Sanskrit drama must be dated a century at least earlier, and we would have the paradoxical position that on Professor Lüders&apos;s date of Açvagho&sdotb;a he must place the drama at not later than Patañjali, while when dealing with the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi> evidence he doubts the existence of the drama. Professor Lüders has overlooked this dilemma, which, however, we may evade on his behalf by recognising that he erred in assigning to Kani&sdotb;ka a date which the evidence available in 1911 already showed to be quite untenable.


<div2 id=ch2.7 n=7>
<head><ab type=divNum>7.</ab> <hi>The Evidence of the Pr&amacr;krits</hi></head>

<p>The discovery of Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s fragments not only disposes effectively of Professor Lévi&apos;s dating of the rise of Sanskrit drama, since he probably preceded Rudrad&amacr;man by at least half a century, but it casts a vivid light on the question of the Pr&amacr;krits and Sanskrit. It must be remembered that Açvagho&sdotb;a was the exponent of a faith which had originally insisted on the use of the vernacular as opposed to Sanskrit, and that it is absurd to imagine that it would have occurred to him to use Sanskrit in dramas of Buddhist inspiration and aim, had not the use of that language been established in the drama of the day. This leads us back once more to the conclusion that the drama from the outset was written in part at least in Sanskrit, and that, therefore, it stands in genetic relation with the dramatic recitations described by Patañjali which were in Sanskrit.

<p>That the drama was also in part in Pr&amacr;krit from the outset seems extremely probable. The mere recitation of the epic <pb n=73 id=pb73 facs="f:073">indeed did not demand any intervention of Pr&amacr;krit, but that such recitations by themselves would produce a true drama is most improbable, and we may legitimately hold that it was only the union of these recitations with action from the religious contest that produced the drama. In that contest we may assume that the lower classes were represented and spoke their own language; in the Vedic Mah&amacr;vrata we cannot suppose that the Ç&umacr;dra who contested the right of the Vaiçya to the symbol of the sun spoke in Sanskrit, nor that the Brahmin and the hetaera exchanged their ritual abuse in the classical tongue, or its Vedic antecedent. The religious festival in which K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a appeared as slaying Ka&ndota;sa must similarly have demanded the use of the vernacular by the humbler members of those who took part in it. The fact that Pr&amacr;krit appears mainly in the dialogue, Sanskrit pre-eminently in verses, strengthens the view that the new drama derived its verse in the main from the epic recitation, its prose dialogue from the religious contest. The two elements never entirely merged; the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka who comes from one side of the religious ceremonial, that which in Greece lies at the basis of comedy as opposed to tragedy, is not a figure normal in the dramas of mainly epic inspiration; but this is not enough to prove that the drama ever in its early days was merely in Sanskrit. It may indeed have been the case; Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s <hi>D&umacr;tav&amacr;kya</hi> has no Pr&amacr;krit, and so far the probability is rather for than against it, as an alternative form.

<p>The question how many Pr&amacr;krits were used in the primitive Sanskrit drama presents difficulties. The obvious conclusion is that the vernacular employed would be that of the region where the drama came into being, and that this was the Ç&umacr;rasena country is not to be denied. Çaurasen&imacr; in fact appears throughout as the normal prose of the drama; it is the language of the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka and the hetaera and normally of all the characters of a play who are born in &Amacr;ry&amacr;varta, and no other dialect even in theory vies with it in importance. The theory and the practice after Bh&amacr;sa ascribe to M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr; the honour of the language of verses sung by maidens who would in prose speak Çaurasen&imacr;. There can be no doubt that this is not primitive, but is a reflex of the growth and development of the fame of the artificial lyric poetry of which we have an anthology under the <pb n=74 id=pb74 facs="f:074">name of H&amacr;la, perhaps to be ascribed to the third or fifth century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi><note n=1 id=n74.1>Jacobi, <hi lang=de>Ausgew. Erzählungen in Mâhârâsh&tdotb;rî</hi>, pp. xiv ff., suggests the fifth century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> for S&amacr;tav&amacr;hana. V. Smith&apos;s date (first cent. <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi>) is certainly wrong. The poetry may probably be as early as the third century; Weber&apos;s ed., p. xxiii; Lévi, TI. i. 326; GIL. iii. 102 f.</note>

<p>To what extent any other Pr&amacr;krit was used in the earliest drama we cannot effectively determine. Bh&amacr;sa has only, besides Çaurasen&imacr;, M&amacr;gadh&imacr; of two kinds, and a few hints of what may be styled Ardha-M&amacr;gadh&imacr;, while Açvagho&sdotb;a has three dialects which suggest much older forms of Çaurasen&imacr;, M&amacr;gadh&imacr;, and Ardha-M&amacr;gadh&imacr;. The use of these dialects for characters by Açvagho&sdotb;a explains itself naturally from his familiarity with the Buddhist scriptures whose original was very probably in something approximating to the Ardha-M&amacr;gadh&imacr;<note n=2 id=n74.2>Lüders, <hi lang=de>Bruchstücke buddhistischer Dramen</hi>, pp. <corr sic="40f.">40 f.</corr>; SBAW. 1913, pp. 1003 ff.</note> he knew, and the fact that the speaker of Old M&amacr;gadh&imacr; is the Du&sdotb;&tdotb;a, or bad man, reminds us of the bad character enjoyed<note n=3 id=n74.3>See Keith in CHI. i. 123 f.</note> by the Magadha. Lévi&apos;s<note n=4 id=n74.4>TI. i. 331.</note> suggestion that the M&amacr;gadh&imacr; of the drama comes from its epic element, and that the M&amacr;gadhas were the reciters of Pr&amacr;krit epic compositions, is clearly untenable, and indeed seems to have been later abandoned by its author in favour of the suggestion that the Pr&amacr;krits of the drama were evolved, because the drama was produced at Ujjayin&imacr;, which was a meeting place of different dialectical forms. This theory might be revised to adapt it to making Mathur&amacr; the headquarters of the drama and M&amacr;gadh&imacr; and Ardha-M&amacr;gadh&imacr; the other dialects, but the restricted use of anything but Çaurasen&imacr; by Bh&amacr;sa suggests that the introduction of other Pr&amacr;krits was a gradual process. In point of fact it never attained great vitality, and in the developed drama Çaurasen&imacr; and M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr; alone play any real part. The ground for the more extended use of dialects when found may be attributed to literary purposes rather than to any attempt to imitate the speech of the day, as Sir George Grierson<note n=5 id=n74.5>IA. xxx. 556.</note> has suggested. The ground for this conclusion, apart from the improbability of so great an effort at realism, is that the dialects used for instance even in the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> are clearly literary and not attempts to reproduce true vernaculars.

<pb n=75 id=pb75 facs="f:075"><p>The stage reached by the Pr&amacr;krits of Açvagho&sdotb;a shows clearly how late are the Pr&amacr;krits of the orthodox classical drama,<note n=1 id=n75.1>A transitional stage of Pr&amacr;krit may, perhaps, be seen in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, but the text is very corrupt; cf. Jacobi, <hi>Bhavisattakaha</hi>, pp. 84 ff.</note> and reminds us how much more closely akin to Sanskrit must have been the Pr&amacr;krit of the drama of the time of, or shortly after, Patañjali. The classical drama with its broken-down forms of Pr&amacr;krit gives a false impression of the original dramatic form in which either perhaps Sanskrit alone, if the matter were epic, or both Sanskrit and a closely akin Çaurasen&imacr; appeared.


<div2 id=ch2.8 n=8>
<head><ab type=divNum>8.</ab> <hi>The Literary Antecedents of the Drama</hi></head>

<p>The drama owes in part its origin to the epics of India; from them throughout its history it derives largely its inspiration, far more truly so indeed than Greek tragedy as compared with the Greek epic.<note n=2 id=n75.2>Cf. Aischylos in Athen., p. 347.</note> From the epics also developed the K&amacr;vya, the refined and polished epic, which appears at its best in the <hi>Kum&amacr;rasambhava</hi> and <hi>Raghuva&ndota;ça</hi> of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa. The parallelism between the developed form of both is close and striking. The <hi>S&amacr;hityadarpa&ndotb;a</hi><note n=3 id=n75.3>559. See Da&ndotb;&ddotb;in, <hi>K&amacr;vy&amacr;darça</hi>, i. 14 ff., and cf. the analyses of Ma&nmacr;kha&apos;s <hi>Çr&imacr;ka&ndotb;&tdotb;hacarita</hi> (twelfth cent.) and Haricandra&apos;s <hi>Dharmaçarm&amacr;bhyudaya</hi> in Lévi, TI. i. 337 ff.; Keith, <hi>Sansk. Lit.</hi>, pp. 38 ff.</note> lays down that it is a composition in several cantos, the hero a god or K&sdotb;atriya of high race, of the type noble and superior; if there are several heroes, they are persons of royal rank of one family. The sentiment which predominates is the erotic, the heroic, or occasionally that of calm; the others serve in a subsidiary rôle. The subject-matter is either taken from tradition or not, but the heroes must be virtuous. The work begins with a prayer, a benediction, or an indication of the subject-matter. The development of the story employs the same five junctures as the theory prescribes for the drama. One or other of the four aims of man, wealth, love, performance of duty, or release, is to be attained by the action. The number of cantos is not to be less than eight; each should end in a different metre, and should announce the subject of the following act. Descriptions of every kind are essential; objects of these are the different times of day, the sun, the moon, night, the <pb n=76 id=pb76 facs="f:076">dawn, twilight, darkness, morning, midday, the hunt, mountains, the seasons, forests, the ocean, the sky, a town, the pleasures of love, the misery of separation from one&apos;s beloved, a sacrifice, a battle, the march of an army, a marriage, the birth of a son, all of which should be developed in appropriate detail.

<p>The essential feature of these little epics is the enormous development of the art of description, and the feature occurs in the other forms of narrative literature, the Kath&amacr;, tale, and the &Amacr;khy&amacr;yik&amacr;, romance, types which blend with each other. Whether the subject be an imaginary theme, as is the <hi>V&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi> of Subandhu, or a historical one, as in the <hi>Har&sdotb;acarita</hi> of B&amacr;&ndotb;a, we find nothing treated as really important save the descriptions as contrasted with the narrative. The Sanskrit lyric also, in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s masterpiece, the <hi>Meghad&umacr;ta</hi>, is essentially descriptive, as is the Pr&amacr;krit lyric preserved in the collection of H&amacr;la, which is based on the model of an older lyric in Sanskrit, whose existence is revealed to us by the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi>.

<p>The love of description, however, is not new; it is a characteristic of the epic itself, and the <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> in special shows us how the way for the court poetry was being prepared.<note n=1 id=n76.1>See Jacobi, <hi lang=de>Das R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, pp. 119 ff.; Walter, <hi>Indica</hi>, III.</note> Hence the fact that the verses of the drama are overwhelmingly descriptive, when not gnomic in character, is no matter for surprise. The peculiarity is a direct inheritance from the epic.

<p>This fact has one important bearing on the history of the drama. The suggestion of Pischel<note n=2 id=n76.2>Such a drama as the <hi>Haragaur&imacr;viv&amacr;ha</hi> of Jagajjyotirmalla of Nepal (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1617&ndash;33), which is really a sort of opera with the verses, written in dialect, as the only fixed element (Lévi, <hi lang=fr>Le Népal</hi>, i. 242) is of no cogency for the early drama. The Maithil&imacr; beginnings of drama, based on the classical, give song in dialect, dialogue in Sanskrit and Pr&amacr;krit (Lévi, TI. i. 393).</note> that the verses alone were once preserved, and the prose left to be improvised would have been plausible only if the verses had been essentially the important elements in the dialogue, as in the supposed Vedic &Amacr;khy&amacr;na hymns. But this is assuredly not the case; the verses do little to help on the action; as in the epic, they express descriptions of situations and emotions; when movement of the play is requisite recourse is had to prose. Or the verses serve to set out maxims, as is natural in view of the great fondness of India for gnomic poetry, seen already in the verses introduced <pb n=77 id=pb77 facs="f:077">into the legend of Çuna&hdotb;çepa in the <hi>Aitareya Br&amacr;hma&ndotb;a</hi>. In this again there is a close parallel with the epic, nor is it surprising that the epic poet, like Açvagho&sdotb;a and K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, was often devoted to the drama.

<p>A further source of literary inspiration must undoubtedly be seen in the work of the lyric poets, of whose work clear evidence, as well as some scattered fragments, is preserved to us in the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi> of Patañjali.<note n=1 id=n77.1>Kielhorn, IA. xiv. 326 f.; Lüders, <hi lang=de>Bruchstücke buddhistischer Dramen</hi>, p. 63.</note> Moreover, to these lyric writers it is probable that the drama owed some of its metrical variety; in the development of the metres with a fixed number of syllables, each of determined length, from the older and freer Vedic and epic forms, it may be taken as certain that the erotic poets, who had a narrow theme to handle, and had every motive to aim at variety of form and effect, must have contributed largely, a conclusion which is also strongly suggested, if not proved, by the very names of the metres with their erotic suggestion.<note n=2 id=n77.2>Cf. Weber, IS. viii. 181 ff.; Jacobi, ZDMG. xxxviii. 615 f.</note>






<pb n=79 id=pb79 facs="f:079">
<div0 id=pt2 n=II>
<head type=label>PART II</head>

<head>THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE SANSKRIT DRAMA</head>



<pb n=80 id=pb80 facs="f:080">
<div1 id=ch3 n=III>
<head type=label>III</head>

<head>AÇVAGHO&Sdotb;A AND THE BUDDHIST DRAMA</head>


<div2 id=ch3.1 n=1>
<head><ab type=divNum>1.</ab> <hi>The Ç&amacr;riputraprakara&ndotb;a</hi></head>

<p>The discovery of fragments of manuscripts on palm-leaf, of great antiquity, at Turfan, has through the energy of Professor Lüders revealed to us the existence of at least three Buddhist dramas. Of one of these the authorship is happily certain, for the colophon of the last act has been preserved, and it records that the drama was the <hi>Ç&amacr;riputraprakara&ndotb;a</hi> of Açvagho&sdotb;a, son of Suvar&ndotb;&amacr;k&sdotb;&imacr;; it gives also the fuller title <hi>Ç&amacr;radvat&imacr;putraprakara&ndotb;a</hi> and the number of acts as nine.

<p>Açvagho&sdotb;a is an author whose fame, thanks to his error in being a Buddhist long lost in India, has recently attained renewal by the discovery and publication of his <hi>Buddhacarita</hi>, a court epic in excellent style and spirit on the life of the Buddha. His <hi>S&umacr;tr&amacr;la&mdota;k&amacr;ra</hi> is also known through the medium of a Tibetan translation, and illustrates his ability in turning the tale into an instrument for propaganda in support of the Buddhist faith. If the tradition which ascribes to him the <hi>Mah&amacr;y&amacr;naçraddhotp&amacr;da</hi> is correct, he was also the founder or expounder of a subtle system of metaphysics akin to the Vijñ&amacr;nav&amacr;da of the Mah&amacr;y&amacr;na school, and the <hi>Vajras&umacr;c&imacr;</hi> seems to preserve in some measure the record of his onslaught on the caste system, which exalted the Brahmins at the expense of the K&sdotb;atriyas, and condemned Buddhism on the score that it was unfitting that a K&sdotb;atriya like the Buddha should give instructions to Brahmins. Certainly genuine is the <hi>Saundarananda</hi>, in the epic manner, which like all his works is devoted to the effective exposition of Buddhism in the language of polite literature, and also of the Brahmin schools. We recognize in him one who appreciated that it would never do to allow Buddhism to remain buried in a form inferior to the best that <pb n=81 id=pb81 facs="f:081">Brahminism could produce, and it is curious that fate should have preserved the work of the rival of the Brahmins, while it has permitted his models to disappear. That he had abundant precedent to guide him is clear from the classical form already assumed by his dramas; the argument of Professor Konow<note n=1 id=n81.1>ID. p. 50. For the fragments see Lüders, <hi lang=de>Bruchstücke buddhistischer Dramen</hi> (1911); SBAW. 1911, pp. 388 ff. For his philosophy, cf. Keith, <hi>Buddhist Philosophy</hi>, Part III, ch. iii. The <hi>Saundarananda</hi> is earlier than the <hi>Buddhacarita</hi> and it than the <hi>S&umacr;tr&amacr;la&mdota;k&amacr;ra</hi>.</note> to the contrary, on the ground that many of the standing formulae and characters are derived from the popular drama, and show that the artistic drama had not developed yet full independence, is unintelligible, since these features persist throughout the history of the Sanskrit drama. Nor does any weight attach to the argument that the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, assumed to be of about the same period as Açvagho&sdotb;a, shows knowledge of only a limited variety of dramas. On the contrary it is amazing how much literature must have preceded to permit of the setting up of the main types of drama, some of which were evidently represented by many specimens, though others doubtless rested on a small basis of practice.

<p>The brief fragments preserved of the drama of Açvagho&sdotb;a give us the certainty of his authorship if any doubt could exist after the colophon, for one verse is taken bodily from the <hi>Buddhacarita</hi>, just as he twice refers in the <hi>S&umacr;tr&amacr;la&mdota;k&amacr;ra</hi> to that important work. The story of the play is clear; it deals with the events which led up to the conversion of the young Maudgaly&amacr;yana and Ç&amacr;riputra by the Buddha, and some of the incidents are certain. Ç&amacr;riputra had an interview with Açvajit; then he discussed the question of the claims of the Buddha to be a teacher with his friend, the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, who raised the objection that a Brahmin like his master should not accept the teaching of a K&sdotb;atriya; Ç&amacr;riputra repels the objection by reminding his friend that medicine aids the sick though given by one of inferior caste, as does water one aheat. Maudgaly&amacr;yana greets Ç&amacr;riputra, inquiring of him the cause of his glad appearance, and learns his reasons. The two go to the Buddha, who receives them, and who foretells to them that they will be the highest in knowledge and magic power of his disciples. <pb n=82 id=pb82 facs="f:082">In this point there is a deliberate and certainly artistic deviation from the ordinary version of the incident, followed in the <hi>Buddhacarita</hi>, in which the prophecy of the Buddha is addressed, not to the disciples themselves, but to others of the Buddha&apos;s followers. The end of the play is marked by a philosophic dialogue between Ç&amacr;riputra and the Buddha, which includes a polemic against the belief in the existence of a permanent self; it terminates in a praise of his two new disciples by the Buddha, and a formal benediction.

<p>The most remarkable thing regarding this drama is its close correspondence to the classical type as laid down in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>. The piece is a Prakara&ndotb;a, and it has nine acts, which accords perfectly with the rule of the Ç&amacr;stra; the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> and <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi> have ten apiece; the Acts bear no titles, but this is in accord with the normal usage, though the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> gives names. The hero is Ç&amacr;riputra, who corresponds to the Brahmin hero of the Ç&amacr;stra, and who is emphatically of the noble and calm type enjoined by that authority. Whether the heroine was a lady or a hetaera we do not know, nor does it appear how far the poet altered the subject-matter by invention, which is normally the case with later Prakara&ndotb;as. The Buddha and his disciples, including, beside the two heroes, Kau&ndotb;&ddotb;inya and a Çrama&ndotb;a speak Sanskrit, and use both prose and verse; the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka speaks Pr&amacr;krit. The presence of this figure is a remarkable proof of the fixed character attained by the drama, for in itself there is nothing more absurd than that a youthful ascetic seeking after truth should be encumbered by one who is a meet attendant on a wealthy merchant, Brahmin, or minister. It can, therefore, only be supposed that Açvagho&sdotb;a was writing a type of drama in which the rôle was far too firmly embedded to permit its omission, and presumably in the story of the drama now lost to us the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka served to introduce comic relief. With natural good taste, he disappears from the last Act, where Ç&amacr;riputra has no need as a member of the Buddha&apos;s fraternity for encumbrances like a jester.

<p>In one point only has it been claimed to find a clear discrepancy between Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s practice and that of the later drama. At the close the theory<note n=1 id=n82.1>N. xix. 102.</note> requires that the question, &lsquo;Is <pb n=83 id=pb83 facs="f:083">there anything further that you desire (<hi lang=sa-Latn>ata&hdotb; param api priyam asti</hi>)?&rsquo; be addressed to the hero by himself or another, to which he replies by uttering a benediction styled the Bharatav&amacr;kya. In the drama of Açvagho&sdotb;a the phrase is omitted, and the benediction proceeds, without prelude, with the words, &lsquo;From now on shall these two ever increase their knowledge, restraining their senses, to gain release&rsquo;, spoken by the Buddha, not by the hero. Lüders concludes hence that the regular form of close was not yet established by Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s time. The conclusion is clearly fallacious, and rests on a failure to recognize in this the readiness of Açvagho&sdotb;a to give effect to a traditional usage, while not slavishly following it. It would obviously have been absurd to place the last words in the drama in the form of a benediction in the mouth of any one save the Buddha, and therefore he speaks the benediction. To preface it with the usual formula was needless in his case, but the opening words of the verse are <hi lang=sa-Latn>ata&hdotb; param</hi>, which is obviously not an incredible coincidence, but a deliberate reference to the ordinary phrase. Açvagho&sdotb;a shows thus his knowledge of the rule and his power to vary it in case of need. Similarly Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a in the <hi><corr sic="Ven&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra">Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</corr></hi> puts the Bharatav&amacr;kya in the mouth of Yudhi&sdotb;&tdotb;hira, but he makes K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a end the play by according the favour prayed for by Yudhi&sdotb;&tdotb;hira. He too felt that it would be absurd to leave the omnipotent one in the position of listening without response to the utterance of a benediction by one who cannot be more than an inferior, though nominally the hero.<note n=1 id=n83.1>Similarly in the <hi>P&amacr;rthapar&amacr;krama</hi> of Prahl&amacr;danadeva (twelfth cent.) V&amacr;sava pronounces the benediction.</note>


<div2 id=ch3.2 n=2>
<head><ab type=divNum>2.</ab> <hi>The Allegorical and the Hetaera Dramas</hi></head>

<p>The same manuscript which contains portions of the <hi><corr sic="Çariputraprakara&ndotb;a">Ç&amacr;riputraprakara&ndotb;a</corr></hi> has also fragments of two other dramas. There is no evidence of their authorship, other than the fact that they appear in the same manuscript as the work of Açvagho&sdotb;a, and that they display the same general appearance as the work of that writer. That they are Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s is much more probable than that they are the work of some unknown contemporary.<note n=2 id=n83.2>Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s dramatic powers are also exhibited in the M&amacr;ra legend of the <pb n=84 id=pb84n facs="f:084"><hi>S&umacr;tr&amacr;la&mdota;k&amacr;ra</hi>, which is preserved in the <hi>Divy&amacr;vad&amacr;na</hi> (pp. 356 ff.; Windisch, <hi lang=de>M&amacr;ra und Buddha</hi>, pp. 161 ff.); cf. Huber, BEFEO. iv. 414 f.</note>

<pb n=84 id=pb84 facs="f:084"><p>The first of these is specially interesting as it represents a type of which we have otherwise no earlier specimen than the <hi>Prabodhacandrodaya</hi> of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;amiçra. We find the allegorical figures of Buddhi, wisdom, K&imacr;rti, fame, and Dh&rdotb;ti, firmness, appearing and conversing. This is followed by the advent of the Buddha himself, adorned with the halo which he borrowed from Greek art. We do not know whether he appeared later in actual conversation with the allegorical figures, but for this mixture of the real and the ideal we have to go beyond K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;amiçra, who represents all his characters as abstract, Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u for instance by Faith in Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u, to Kavikar&ndotb;ap&umacr;ra&apos;s glorification of Caitanya in the sixteenth century, in which allegorical figures are mingled with Caitanya and his followers, though they do not actually converse together.<note n=1 id=n84.1>In the Jain <hi>Mohar&amacr;japar&amacr;jaya</hi> (below, ch. xi, § 3) the real and the ideal characters converse.</note> It must remain uncertain whether there was a train of tradition leading from Açvagho&sdotb;a to K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;amiçra, or whether the latter created the type of drama afresh; the former theory is the more likely. The characters all speak Sanskrit, but the fragments are too short to give us any real information on the general trend of the play.

<p>The other drama gives us more interesting matter. It is one in which figures a hetaera named Magadhavat&imacr;, a Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka named Komudhagandha, a hero styled only N&amacr;yaka, but probably named Somadatta, a Du&sdotb;&tdotb;a, rogue, without further name, a certain Dh&amacr;na&mdota;jaya, who may possibly be a prince if the term &lsquo;king&apos;s son&rsquo; (<hi lang=sa-Latn>bha&tdotb;&tdotb;id&amacr;laka</hi>), which is recognized in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> as the style of the younger princes of the blood, applies to him, a maid-servant, and Ç&amacr;riputra and Maudgaly&amacr;yana. The drama was doubtless intended for purposes of religious edification, but what we have is too fragmentary to do more than show that the author was possessed of humour and that the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka was already a hungry soul. The drama alludes to an old garden as the place where part of the action passed, as in the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, and also as in that drama the house of the hetaera served as the scene of another part of the action. The characters are often introduced as entering in vehicles (<hi lang=sa-Latn>pravaha&ndotb;a</hi>), a further point of <pb n=85 id=pb85 facs="f:085">similarity to that drama, while an allusion to a Sam&amacr;ja or festival on a hill-top accords with the frequent reference to such amusements in Buddhist literature. An obscure character is a person, obviously of lower rank, who is styled Goba&mdota;°.

<p>The drama shows close agreement with the classical model; the name of the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka is evidence of this, for not only is it connected with a real Brahmin family, but it obeys the rule that the name of that character should indicate a flower, the spring, &amp;c., for it means literally &lsquo;the offspring of the lotus-smelling&rsquo;. The name of the hetaera does not observe the rule exemplified in the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi> that the hetaera&apos;s name should end in <hi lang=sa-Latn>sen&amacr;</hi>, <hi lang=sa-Latn>siddh&amacr;</hi>, or <hi lang=sa-Latn>datt&amacr;</hi>, but, apart from the fact that the authority for the rule is very late, the name was very probably given to the poet by the literary tradition. The fact that the Du&sdotb;&tdotb;a and the N&amacr;yaka appear by these titles only has a parallel in the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi> and the Buddhist drama of Har&sdotb;a, the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi>, but it is difficult to say whether or not this is a sign of antiquity.

<p>The material available in the case of any of the three dramas is too scanty to give us any assurance as to what the practice was regarding the introduction, especially the use of the N&amacr;nd&imacr;, or verse of benediction. What is certain is that the P&amacr;rip&amacr;rçvika, or assistant of the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra in the later literature, is found apparently as taking part in the opening of the drama, perhaps the <hi>Ç&amacr;riputraprakara&ndotb;a</hi>.


<div2 id=ch3.3 n=3>
<head><ab type=divNum>3.</ab> <hi>The Language of the Dramas</hi></head>

<p>In accordance with the later rules we find the Buddha, his disciples, the hero of the hetaera play and Dh&amacr;na&mdota;jaya speaking Sanskrit; the same is true of the allegorical characters, and this is also in accord with later practice, for in both K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;amiçra and Kavikar&ndotb;ap&umacr;ra&apos;s works some of the allegorical characters speak Sanskrit, though others, of more feminine appeal and character, speak Pr&amacr;krit. One Çrama&ndotb;a speaks Sanskrit, another&mdash;conceivably an &Amacr;j&imacr;vika&mdash;a Pr&amacr;krit.

<p>The Sanskrit contains some errors, which are obvious Pr&amacr;kritisms, and which it would be unjust to attribute to the author, or authors. Genuine departures from the norm are scanty; the use of <hi lang=sa-Latn>&amacr;rttha</hi> for <hi lang=sa-Latn>artha</hi> has a precise parallel in the nearly contemporaneous dialect of Mathur&amacr;; <hi lang=sa-Latn>tu&sdotb;&ndotb;&imacr;m</hi> is frequent in <pb n=86 id=pb86 facs="f:086">Buddhist Sanskrit as well as etymologically correct; <hi lang=sa-Latn>krimi</hi> is found also in the <hi>Buddhacarita</hi> where the reading <hi lang=sa-Latn>k&rdotb;mi</hi> would spoil the metre; <hi lang=sa-Latn>prat&imacr;g&rdotb;h&imacr;ta</hi> has many Sanskrit parallels. In <hi lang=sa-Latn>pradve&sdotb;am</hi> where the metre requires <hi lang=sa-Latn>prado&sdotb;am</hi> Buddhist influence is doubtless present, but <hi lang=sa-Latn>yeva</hi> and <hi lang=sa-Latn>t&amacr;va</hi> are probably merely errors of the scribe, to whom may be assigned such a monstrosity as <hi lang=sa-Latn>paçyemas</hi> and <hi>Somadattassa</hi>. But <hi lang=sa-Latn>bhagav&amacr;&mdota;</hi> has the support of the practice of the <hi>Mah&amacr;vastu</hi> where stems in <hi lang=sa-Latn>mat</hi> and <hi lang=sa-Latn>vat</hi> end thus, and it explains the Sandhi <hi>ç&rdotb;&ndotb;vam pu&sdotb;p&amacr;</hi>. These are minimal variants; in the main the Sanskrit is excellent and the fragments shows traces of the able versification and style of Açvagho&sdotb;a.

<p>The other characters speak Pr&amacr;krit, and, by a curious variation from the normal practice, the stage directions, which are freely given as in the classical drama, are normally expressed in the language which the character concerned uses, though there are cases of mixture and apparent confusion which may be due to the scribe. Three different forms of Pr&amacr;krit may be distinguished, the first spoken by the Du&sdotb;&tdotb;a, the second by the mysterious Goba&mdota;°, and the third by the hetaera and Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka.

<p>The Du&sdotb;&tdotb;a&apos;s speech in three important points is similar to the M&amacr;gadh&imacr; of the Pr&amacr;krit grammarians; it substitutes <hi>l</hi> for <hi>r</hi>; reduces all three sibilants to <hi>ç</hi>; and has <hi>e</hi> in the nominative singular of masculine nouns in <hi>a</hi>. But it ignores the rules of the grammarians in certain matters; hard letters are not softened (e.g. <hi lang=sa-Latn>bhoti</hi>), nor soft consonants elided (e.g. <hi lang=sa-Latn>komudagandha</hi>), when intervocalic. There is no tendency to cerebralize <hi>n</hi>, and in <hi lang=sa-Latn>k&amacr;lan&amacr;</hi> the dental replaces the cerebral. Fuller forms of consonants remain in <hi lang=sa-Latn>ha&nmacr;gho</hi> (<hi lang=sa-Latn>ha&ndota;ho</hi>) and <hi lang=sa-Latn>bambha&ndotb;a</hi> (<hi lang=sa-Latn>bamha&ndotb;a</hi>). The later forms of development of consonantal combinations are unknown; thus for <hi>rj</hi> we have <hi>jj</hi>, not <hi>yy</hi>, as in <hi>ajja</hi>; <hi>cch</hi> remains in lieu of becoming <hi>çc</hi>; <hi>k&sdotb;</hi> becomes <hi>kkh</hi>, not <hi>sk</hi> or <hi>&hbarb;k</hi>; <hi>&sdotb;&tdotb;</hi> and <hi>&sdotb;&tdotb;h</hi> give <hi>&tdotb;&tdotb;h</hi>, not <hi>s&tdotb;</hi>. In <hi lang=sa-Latn>kiçça</hi> we have an older form than <hi lang=sa-Latn>k&imacr;ça</hi>, in <hi lang=sa-Latn>ahaka&mdota;</hi> than <hi lang=sa-Latn>ahake</hi>, <hi lang=sa-Latn>hake</hi>, <hi lang=sa-Latn>hage</hi>. In practically all these details we must see an earlier stage of what becomes M&amacr;gadh&imacr; in the grammarians. With it may be compared the metrical inscription of the Jog&imacr;m&amacr;r&amacr; cave on the R&amacr;mgarh hill which belongs to the period of Açoka.

<p>The Pr&amacr;krit of the Goba&mdota;° agrees with this Old M&amacr;gadh&imacr; in having <hi>l</hi> for <hi>r</hi> and <hi>e</hi> in the nominative singular, but it reduces all <pb n=87 id=pb87 facs="f:087">sibilants to <hi>s</hi>. It thus shows a certain similarity to the Ardha-M&amacr;gadh&imacr; of the grammarians, but that dialect often keeps <hi>r</hi> though it frequently alters it to <hi>l</hi>; for instance it has <hi>r</hi> for the <hi lang=sa-Latn>kaleti</hi> of this Pr&amacr;krit and the Old M&amacr;gadh&imacr;. Other points of similarity are the retention of the dental for cerebral in <hi lang=sa-Latn>vanna</hi>; the lengthening of the vowel before the suffix <hi lang=sa-Latn>ka</hi> (<hi lang=sa-Latn>vann&imacr;k&amacr;hi</hi>); the accusative plural neuter in <hi lang=sa-Latn>pupph&amacr;</hi>; and the infinitive <hi lang=sa-Latn>bhu&mdota;jitaye</hi> (<hi lang=sa-Latn>bhuñjittae</hi>). There are points of difference, but they are probably all cases of earlier forms. Thus, as in Old M&amacr;gadh&imacr;, we have no softening or loss of intervocalic consonants; <hi>n</hi> is not cerebralised, but even introduced in <hi lang=sa-Latn>palinata</hi>; <hi>&ldotb;</hi> appears in lieu of <hi>l</hi>; the instrumental in <hi>&amacr;hi</hi> has no nasal; the nominative of <hi lang=sa-Latn>vat</hi> stems appears as in <hi lang=sa-Latn>v&amacr;</hi>, as against <hi lang=sa-Latn>va&mdota;</hi> or <hi lang=sa-Latn>vante</hi>; in the infinitive we find no doubling of the consonant in <hi lang=sa-Latn>taye</hi>. The fact, however, of the regular change of <hi>r</hi> to <hi>l</hi> and the use of the form <hi lang=sa-Latn>yeva</hi> after a long vowel as in M&amacr;gadh&imacr; and P&amacr;li show that the Old Ardha-M&amacr;gadh&imacr; was more akin to M&amacr;gadh&imacr; than the later Ardha-M&amacr;gadh&imacr;, which came steadily under the influence of the western dialects as shown by the tendency to change <hi>e</hi> of the nominative to <hi>o</hi>.

<p>There are strong points of similarity between this Old Ardha-M&amacr;gadh&imacr; and the language of Açoka&apos;s pillar inscriptions. They agree as regards the use of <hi>l</hi>, <hi>s</hi>, and <hi>e</hi>, the dentals in <hi lang=sa-Latn>palinata</hi> and <hi lang=sa-Latn>vann&imacr;k&amacr;hi</hi>, <hi lang=sa-Latn>yeva</hi> after long vowels, and the long vowel before the suffix <hi lang=sa-Latn>ka</hi>. They disagree in the nominative and accusative plural neuter of <hi>a</hi> stems, which have <hi>&amacr;ni</hi> in the inscriptions as against <hi>&amacr;</hi>, but that is of no great importance, as these are doublets. The infinitive, however, is in <hi lang=sa-Latn>tave</hi>, which cannot be equated with <hi lang=sa-Latn>taye</hi>; Ardha-M&amacr;gadh&imacr; <hi lang=sa-Latn>ttae</hi> may be from either.

<p>The Açokan dialect is doubtless the court speech of his kingdom, and a descendant of the Ardha-M&amacr;gadh&imacr; of Mah&amacr;v&imacr;ra, the founder of the Jain religion, and probably also of the Buddha, whose speech was clearly not akin to the M&amacr;gadh&imacr; of the grammarians, though it is called M&amacr;gadh&imacr; in the sacred texts.<note n=1 id=n87.1>Cf. Lüders, SBAW. 1913, pp. 999 ff.</note>

<p>The theory of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> assigns Ardha-M&amacr;gadh&imacr; as the language of savants, sons of kings or R&amacr;jputs, and Çre&sdotb;&tdotb;hins, rich merchants, but, with the exception of Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s <hi>Kar&ndotb;abh&amacr;ra</hi>, it does not appear in the extant dramas. M&amacr;gadh&imacr;, on the contrary, <pb n=88 id=pb88 facs="f:088">is required in the case of men who live in the women&apos;s apartments, diggers of underground passages, keepers of drink shops, watchers, the hero himself in time of danger, and the Çak&amacr;ra. Into which category the Du&sdotb;&tdotb;a falls is not certain; the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi> ascribes this Pr&amacr;krit to low people in general.

<p>Çaurasen&imacr; is ascribed to the hetaera by the Ç&amacr;stra which gives Pr&amacr;cy&amacr; or eastern dialect to the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, but it is clear that the Pr&amacr;cy&amacr; is a mere variety of Çaurasen&imacr;, from which it differs only in the use of certain expressions. This is borne out by the dramas, in which there is no real distinction between the speech of these two characters. With the Çaurasen&imacr; of the grammarians it shows remarkable parallels. It has <hi>r</hi> in lieu of changing it to <hi>l</hi>; it reduces the sibilants to <hi>s</hi>; and for the nominative masculine it has <hi>o</hi>. Further, it changes <hi>k&sdotb;</hi> into <hi>kkh</hi>, not <hi>cch</hi>; for <hi lang=sa-Latn>chard</hi> it has <hi lang=sa-Latn>cha&ddotb;&ddotb;</hi>, for <hi lang=sa-Latn>mard</hi>, <hi lang=sa-Latn>madd</hi>; for <hi lang=sa-Latn>saçr&imacr;kam</hi> irregularly <hi lang=sa-Latn>sassir&imacr;ka&mdota;</hi> with the double <hi>s</hi> despite the epenthetic vowel; and in the third singular future <hi lang=sa-Latn>issiti</hi>. The gerund <hi lang=sa-Latn>kariya</hi> is parallel to <hi lang=sa-Latn>karia</hi> in Hemacandra&apos;s grammar; <hi lang=sa-Latn>bha&tdotb;&tdotb;&amacr;</hi> is the vocative of <hi lang=sa-Latn>bhart&rdotb;</hi>; <hi lang=sa-Latn>iya&mdota;</hi> is feminine as later <hi lang=sa-Latn>ia&mdota;</hi> in Çaurasen&imacr; alone; <hi lang=sa-Latn>bhav&amacr;&mdota;</hi> as nominative is comparable with <hi lang=sa-Latn>bhava&mdota;</hi>; <hi lang=sa-Latn>bha&ndotb;</hi> is conjugated in the ninth class; <hi lang=sa-Latn>viya</hi> is parallel to <hi lang=sa-Latn>via</hi> for <hi lang=sa-Latn>iva</hi>; and <hi lang=sa-Latn>d&amacr;ni</hi> with loss of <hi>i</hi> as a particle is similar to <hi lang=sa-Latn>d&amacr;&ndotb;i&mdota;</hi>.

<p>In other cases the forms of this Pr&amacr;krit are clearly older than those of the grammarians&apos; Çaurasen&imacr;. As in the other Pr&amacr;krits of the drama, there is no softening or omission of intervocalic consonants, and no cerebralization of <hi>n</hi>. Further, initial <hi>y</hi> is kept, not reduced to <hi>j</hi>; the interjection <hi>ai</hi> in lieu of <hi>aï</hi> is supported by the language of the Girn&amacr;r and Udayagiri inscriptions; in <hi>niruss&amacr;sam</hi> we have an older form than <hi>&umacr;sasida</hi> of Çaurasen&imacr;; <hi>jñ</hi> and <hi>ny</hi> give <hi>ññ</hi>, not the later <hi>&ndotb;&ndotb;</hi>; <hi>dy</hi> gives <hi>yy</hi> (written <hi>y</hi>) for <hi>jj</hi>; <hi>tuva&mdota;</hi> and <hi>tava</hi> are both manifestly older than the forms <hi>tuma&mdota;</hi> and <hi>tuha</hi>, while <hi>karotha</hi> is a remarkable example of the preservation of the old strong base. Old also is the preservation of the long vowel in <hi>bhav&amacr;&mdota;</hi>. In <hi>ada&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;raho</hi> and the dubious <hi>arhessi</hi> we have two variants on the rule of Çaurasen&imacr;, which has <hi>i</hi> as the epenthetic vowel in <hi>arh</hi>, but this merely illustrates the uncertainty of these epentheses; <hi>dugu&ndotb;a</hi> in lieu of <hi>diu&ndotb;a</hi> is not older, but a variant mode of treating <hi>dvigu&ndotb;a</hi>, and there is no special difficulty in holding that <hi>d&amacr;&ndotb;i</hi> and <hi>id&amacr;&ndotb;i</hi> are forms which <pb n=89 id=pb89 facs="f:089">were originally doublets of <hi>d&amacr;&ndotb;i&mdota;</hi> and <hi>id&amacr;&ndotb;i&mdota;</hi> in Çaurasen&imacr;, and later were superseded. From other Pr&amacr;krit passages, presumably in the same Old Çaurasen&imacr;, we obtain old forms like <hi>vaya&mdota;</hi>, we, and <hi>tumh&amacr;ka&mdota;</hi> in lieu of <hi>tumh&amacr;&ndotb;a&mdota;</hi>; <hi>edisa</hi> for <hi>erisa</hi> or <hi>&imacr;disa</hi>; <hi>dissati</hi> for <hi>d&imacr;sadi</hi>; <hi>gah&imacr;ta&mdota;</hi> for <hi>gahida&mdota;</hi>; <hi>khu</hi> is kept after short vowels in lieu of being doubled; a long vowel is kept before <hi>tti</hi> and such forms as <hi>mhi</hi>. The future in <hi>gamiss&amacr;ma</hi> is probably old, while <hi>nikkhanta</hi> and <hi>bambha&ndotb;a</hi> admit of this explanation against the later <hi>nikkanta</hi> and <hi>bamha&ndotb;a</hi>.

<p>In the words of the hetaera the word <hi>surada</hi> occurs, with softening of <hi>t</hi> to <hi>d</hi>; conceivably the passage might be verse, but in all probability we are merely faced with a sporadic instance of a change which later set in, due perhaps to a copyist&apos;s error; to find in it an evidence of M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr; would be unwise, especially as the very next word (<hi>vimadda</hi>) is not in the M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr; form (<hi>vima&ddotb;&ddotb;a</hi>). In the dialect of the Du&sdotb;&tdotb;a we have a form <hi>makka&tdotb;aho</hi> which may be genitive, as in Apabhra&ndota;ça, but is not allowed in M&amacr;gadh&imacr;; but the sense is too uncertain to permit of any security.

<p>The existence and literary use of these Pr&amacr;krits is most interesting in the history both of the language and the literature, for they present archaic features which place them on the same plane of change as P&amacr;li and the dialects of the older inscriptions. They may be set beside the inscriptions in the S&imacr;t&amacr;beng&amacr; and Jog&imacr;m&amacr;r&amacr; caves on the R&amacr;mgarh hill, which both show lyric strophes. The influence of the K&amacr;vya style in Sanskrit can be traced obviously in the later N&amacr;sik inscription in Pr&amacr;krit of the second century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi>, and even in the inscription of Kh&amacr;ravela of Kali&nmacr;ga perhaps in the second century <hi rend=asc>B.C.</hi><note n=1 id=n89.1>That any date is given in the inscription is wholly uncertain; see discussions in IA. xlvii. 223 f.; xlviii. 124, 206 f.; xlix. 30, 43 ff.; JRAS. 1910, pp. 324 ff.</note> We cannot, therefore, see any plausibility in the idea of the gradual adaptation of Sanskrit, a sacred language, to belles lettres; on the contrary the dramas show that the Pr&amacr;krits in literature were already under the influence of the Sanskrit K&amacr;vya.


<div2 id=ch3.4 n=4>
<head><ab type=divNum>4.</ab> <hi>The Metres</hi></head>

<p>Scanty as the fragments are, they display another feature significant of the development of the drama on the classical <pb n=90 id=pb90 facs="f:090">lines. The metres employed are very numerous, as is natural in a poetry in which the verse serves essentially the purpose of displaying the skill of the writer. In addition to the Çloka we find the Upaj&amacr;ti (&#x23D3; - &#x23D1; - - &#x23D1; &#x23D1; - &#x23D1; - -), the Ç&amacr;lin&imacr; (- - - -, - &#x23D1; - - &#x23D1; - -), Va&ndota;çasth&amacr; (&#x23D1; - &#x23D1; - - &#x23D1; &#x23D1; - &#x23D1; - &#x23D1; -), Prahar&sdotb;i&ndotb;&imacr; (- - -, &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; - &#x23D1; - &#x23D1; - -), Vasantatilaka (- - &#x23D1; - &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; - &#x23D1; &#x23D1; - &#x23D1; - -), M&amacr;lin&imacr; (&#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; - -, - &#x23D1; - - &#x23D1; - -), Çikhari&ndotb;&imacr; (&#x23D1; - - - - -, &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; - - &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; -), Hari&ndotb;&imacr; (&#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; -, - - - -, &#x23D1; - &#x23D1; &#x23D1; - &#x23D1; -), Ç&amacr;rd&umacr;lavikr&imacr;&ddotb;ita (- - - &#x23D1; &#x23D1; - &#x23D1; - &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; -, - - &#x23D1; - - &#x23D1; -), Sragdhar&amacr; (- - - - &#x23D1; - -, &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; -, - &#x23D1; - - &#x23D1; - -), and Suvadan&amacr; (- - - - &#x23D1; - -, &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; -, - - &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; -), the last of these metres being almost a stranger to the drama, though it appears in Bh&amacr;sa, in the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, and once in Var&amacr;hamihira. The tendency to seek sound effects is clear in a Çikhari&ndotb;&imacr; verse.

<p>That so many metres of elaborate form should be found is of great interest, not merely as testimony of the early development of the K&amacr;vya literature, but also because we see that the drama as early as Açvagho&sdotb;a, and doubtless long before him, had definitely accepted the verses not as essential elements of the dialogue as are the verses in Greek drama, but as more or less ornamental excursions. In the absence of any complete play we cannot say what proportion of Çlokas was observed by Açvagho&sdotb;a; we may suspect that it was not higher than in Bh&amacr;sa, if so high. Now the Çloka by its comparative simplicity and brevity, and by the ease of its structure, might well have served the same purpose in the Indian drama as did the trimeter in that of Greece, and it is curious to speculate what might have been the fate of the drama if it had been felt possible to write it throughout in verse. But evidently by Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s age the distinction between prose and stanzas, essentially lyric in type, was fixed, and the elaborate structure of the stanza, normally with four lines of equal length and identic structure, the longer lines having also caesuras, rendered it quite unsuitable as a medium of conversation. Thus early in the drama we find a defect in form which was gradually to become more and more marked and to render the dialogue, that is the essential feature of the drama, less and less the subject of the labours of the dramatists.






<pb n=91 id=pb91 facs="f:091">
<div1 id=ch4 n=IV>
<head type=label>IV</head>

<head>BH&Amacr;SA</head>


<div2 id=ch4.1 n=1>
<head><ab type=divNum>1.</ab> <hi>The Authenticity of Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s Dramas</hi></head>

<p>Until 1910 the existence of any drama of Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s was unknown in Europe, and only in 1912 appeared under the editorship of T. Ga&ndotb;apati Ç&amacr;strin, the first of a series of thirteen dramas which their discoverer attributed to that poet. The fact, however, that the dramas themselves are silent as to the authorship rendered careful research necessary to determine their provenance, and the proofs adduced have not won entire satisfaction.

<p>What we knew before the publication of Bh&amacr;sa was simply his high reputation. K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa in his first work, the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi>, refers to Bh&amacr;sa, with Saumilla, Kaviputra, and others as his great predecessors in the art, whose fame renders difficult the acceptance of the work of an untried author. B&amacr;&ndotb;a,<note n=1 id=n91.1><hi>Har&sdotb;acarita</hi>, intr. v. 16.</note> at the beginning of the seventh century, states that Bh&amacr;sa attained fame by his dramas, begun by the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra, with many rôles and including episodes, as one might by the erection of temples, begun by the architect, with many stages, and beflagged. It would be unwise to prove by this that Bh&amacr;sa innovated in these regards; what is essential to B&amacr;&ndotb;a is to celebrate Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s fame, and to show his wit by the comparison in the same words with some not very obvious object of comparison. A century later V&amacr;kpati<note n=2 id=n91.2><hi><corr sic="Gaüdavaha">Gaü&ddotb;avaha</corr></hi>, 800.</note> declares his pleasure in Bh&amacr;sa, friend of fire (<hi>jala&ndotb;amitte</hi>), in the author of the <hi>Raghuva&ndota;ça</hi>, in Subandhu and H&amacr;ricandra. R&amacr;jaçekhara (<hi>c.</hi> <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 900) places him among the classical poets, and a verse records a curious incident: &lsquo;Critics cast on the fire, to test it, the discus composed of the dramas of Bh&amacr;sa; the <hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi> did not succumb to the <pb n=92 id=pb92 facs="f:092">flames&rsquo;.<note n=1 id=n92.1>Cf. Chandradhar Guleri, IA. xlii. 52 ff.</note> The verse, however, contains a <hi>double entendre</hi> strangely ignored by Professor Konow;<note n=2 id=n92.2>ID., p. 51, who also misses the point of <hi>Bh&amacr;san&amacr;&tdotb;akacakra</hi> by taking it to refer to one play only.</note> it denotes of course the superiority of the <hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi> to the other dramas of Bh&amacr;sa&mdash;a fact which the published plays bear out to the full&mdash;but it also alludes to a reason; the play itself contains a fire, which was feigned by the minister to permit the possibility of the king&apos;s new marriage, and it is only appropriate that, as that fire could not burn the queen, so the fire which tried the play was unable to prevail against it. The passage throws the necessary light on the term &lsquo;friend of fire&rsquo; of V&amacr;kpati, which should not be rendered meaningless by attributing it to the fact that Bh&amacr;sa often mentions fire in his dramas.

<p>These facts are, it must at once be admitted, extremely favourable to the authenticity of the dramas; taken all in all they are clearly the work of a very considerable writer; in technique they are less finished than those of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa; the Pr&amacr;krit is clearly earlier than that of the works of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa or the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>; the <hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi> is clearly the best, and it explains V&amacr;kpati and R&amacr;jaçekhara&apos;s references. B&amacr;&ndotb;a&apos;s statement regarding the opening of the plays by the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra is proved by the dramas. There is also substantial evidence to be derived from the writers on rhetoric. Bh&amacr;maha, who may belong to the beginning of the eighth century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi>, criticizes severely the plot of the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>; V&amacr;mana, in the eighth, cites from that play, the <hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi>, and the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi>; Abhinavagupta (<hi>c.</hi> <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1000) twice names the <hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi>, and mentions the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi>. These references are not in themselves conclusive, for they do not mention Bh&amacr;sa as the author of the plays, even when these are named,<note n=3 id=n92.3>Cf. Lindenau, BS., p. 48, n. 1.</note> and not merely cited from or discussed, but they show that the critics knew and were prepared to cite these dramas, which means that they accepted the view that they were by an important author. The ascription of the <hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi> to Bh&amacr;sa gives us the right to accept his authorship of the rest if internal evidence supports it. That this is so is undeniable, <pb n=93 id=pb93 facs="f:093">even by those who suspect the attribution to Bh&amacr;sa; the coincidences in technique, in the Pr&amacr;krits, in metre, and in style are overwhelming. Finally, there is the evidence of the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi>; it is undeniably and obviously the prototype of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, and it proves, therefore, that the dramas are older than that work which was well known by V&amacr;mana, and is certainly a good deal earlier.

<p>The arguments<note n=1 id=n93.1>Barnett, JRAS. 1919, pp. 233 ff.; 1921, pp. 587 ff. Contrast G. Morgenstierne, <hi lang=de>Über das Verhältnis zwischen C&amacr;rudatta und M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, p. 16, n. 1; Keith, IA. lii. 59 f.; Thomas, JRAS. 1922, pp. 79 ff.; Winternitz, GIL. iii. 186, 645.</note> against the authenticity are all inconclusive. They are based on the fact that a drama, <hi>Mattavil&amacr;sa</hi>, of Mahendravikramavarman, of the seventh century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> presents the same characteristics as regards the form of opening the drama as the plays of Bh&amacr;sa, and the suggestion that R&amacr;jasi&ndota;ha is to be identified with a prince of the south of that name (<hi>c.</hi> <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 675). The evidence is clearly inadequate; Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s fame was evidently more prevalent in the south than in the north, for a scene from one of his plays has survived in a mutilated form in the popular theatre there, and it is easy to understand how a seventh-century writer imitated him in technique. Moreover, the imitation is very partial; the omission of the name of the author and the play is not followed, and this is certainly a sign of a later date for the <hi>Mattavil&amacr;sa</hi>. The guess regarding the identification of the king is without probative force, for the term seems deliberately vague, and is in keeping with the silence of the author regarding his own name and that of his drama. The introduction of immediate reality is incongruous, and, therefore, avoided.


<div2 id=ch4.2 n=2>
<head><ab type=divNum>2.</ab> <hi>The Date of Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s Dramas</hi></head>

<p>It is difficult to arrive at any precise determination of Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s date. That K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa knew his fame as firmly established is clear, and, if we may fairly safely date K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa about <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 400, this gives us a period of not later than <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 350 for Bh&amacr;sa. The fact of his priority to the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> leads us to no definite result, for the view that this play is to be placed before K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa in the third century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> is not at all plausible. An upper limit is given by the fact that Bh&amacr;sa is doubtless later than Açvagho&sdotb;a, whose <hi>Buddhacarita</hi> is probably the source of a <pb n=94 id=pb94 facs="f:094">verse in the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, and whose Pr&amacr;krit is assuredly and unquestionably older in character. It is useless to seek to estimate by the evidence of the Pr&amacr;krit whether Bh&amacr;sa is more closely allied in date to K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa than to Açvagho&sdotb;a, because changes in speech and the representation of them in literature are matters which do not in the slightest degree permit of exact valuation in terms of years. The most that can be said is that it may be held without improbability that Bh&amacr;sa is nearer to K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s period than to Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s.

<p>An effort at more exact determination is made by Professor Konow<note n=1 id=n94.1>KF. pp. 109 ff.</note> on the ground that Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s dramas in part deal with the story of Udayana, of which Ujjayin&imacr; was specially fond, as we know from K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa. Hence we may assume that the home of the poet was Ujjayin&imacr;, an assumption which obviously is not legitimate in any degree. Further we may assume that he lived under one of the Western K&sdotb;atrapas, which again goes too far. Now the usual ending of a drama is not regularly observed in Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s dramas; the introductory question is found only in the <hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi>, <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, <hi>B&amacr;lacarita</hi>, and <hi>D&umacr;tav&amacr;kya</hi>. The description of the final benediction as Bharatav&amacr;kya is omitted in the <hi>Madhyamavy&amacr;yoga</hi>, where Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u is praised; in the <hi>D&umacr;tagha&tdotb;otkaca</hi>, where his commands are given; in the <hi>Pañcar&amacr;tra</hi>, where the wish is expressed that the king (<hi>r&amacr;jasi&ndota;ha</hi>) should rule the whole earth; and in the <hi>&Umacr;rubha&nmacr;ga</hi>, where the wish is that the prince should conquer his foes and rule the earth. In the other plays a change of form of the Bharatav&amacr;kya is asserted; in the <hi>Kar&ndotb;abh&amacr;ra</hi> there is the desire for the disappearance of misfortune; in the <hi>Pratim&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi> the wish is that the king may fare as R&amacr;ma who was reunited with S&imacr;t&amacr; and his kinsmen; in the <hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi>, the <hi>Abhi&sdotb;ekan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, and the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, that the king should, after destroying his foes, rule the whole earth, while in the <hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi>, <hi>D&umacr;tav&amacr;kya</hi>, and <hi>B&amacr;lacarita</hi>, the wish is for universal rule. This suggests that for a time the king reigned in peace; then enemies arose and disturbed his power; finally he again won the upper hand, and his friends could without absurdity pray for his attaining imperial rank. This would agree with the history of the K&sdotb;atrapa Rudrasi&ndota;ha, who held from 181&ndash;8, and <pb n=95 id=pb95 facs="f:095">again from <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 191&ndash;6 the high rank of Mah&amacr;k&sdotb;atrapa, and whose name may be hinted at in the use of the term <hi>r&amacr;jasi&ndota;ha</hi>. That the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> is older than the <hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi> is held to support this suggestion, but it is clearly without any merit save ingenuity.

<p>Nor is there more to be said for Konow&apos;s other suggestions of date; the fact that the term N&amacr;&tdotb;aka is used, and that the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka appears, cannot show that he is early, for they are used on continuously to the latest days of the drama, and the view that Bh&amacr;sa was an innovator who shortened the preliminaries, which is given as a reason for making him early, because the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> gives the preliminaries in detail, is abandoned <hi>sub silentio</hi> in the author&apos;s later work,<note n=1 id=n95.1>ID. p. 25; cf. Pischel, GGA. 1891, p. 361; below, p. 126.</note> where it is candidly admitted that we do not know whether he shortened the preliminaries at all. Nor can we say anything regarding his relation to the <hi><corr sic="N&amacr;&tdotb;yaçastra">N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</corr></hi> which will aid us to a date; there is even a tradition that he himself wrote on the theory of the drama. Nor can any weight be attached to the view that Bh&amacr;sa stands nearer Açvagho&sdotb;a in technique than K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa; these matters do not permit of precise evaluation in time, and, if we place Bh&amacr;sa about <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 300, we go as far as the evidence allows.


<div2 id=ch4.3 n=3>
<head><ab type=divNum>3.</ab> <hi>The Dramas and their Sources</hi></head>

<p>The derivation of the drama in part from epic recitations is peculiarly clear in Bh&amacr;sa, who shows the influence of the two great epics in its clearest form. In the <hi>Madhyamavy&amacr;yoga</hi><note n=2 id=n95.2>All the dramas are ed. in TSS. 1912&ndash;15 by T. Ga&ndotb;apati Ç&amacr;strin; this play is trs. E. P. Janvier, Mysore, 1921; P. E. Pavolini, GSAI. xxix. 1 f. who points out that the Bakavadha of the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;rata</hi> is used.</note> we have a reminiscence of the tale of the love of the demon Hi&ddotb;imb&amacr; for Bh&imacr;ma, the third of the five P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;avas, and their marriage which has Gha&tdotb;otkaca as its fruit, though the parents part. The play opens with preliminary rites, after which the director pronounces a benediction on the audience, and begins to address them, but is suddenly interrupted by a sound, which is revealed as the cry of a Brahmin, who with his three sons and his wife is being pursued by the demon Gha&tdotb;otkaca. The demon has received orders from his mother to bring her a victim; he offers, therefore, <pb n=96 id=pb96 facs="f:096">to spare the rest of the family, if one is willing to go with him, and the midmost, Madhyama, of the sons decides to go, though there is a generous rivalry among the three in self-sacrifice. He asks, however, time to go to perform a rite of purification, and, as he tarries, the demon in anger calls aloud for him. Bh&imacr;ma responds, as the midmost of the P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;avas; he will go in the boy&apos;s place, but not by force. The demon, not knowing his father, seeks to compel him, but, failing, accepts his offer to go willingly. Hi&ddotb;imb&amacr; greets her husband with joy, and reproaches her son and bids him express regret. She explains that her demand was made expressly to win for her a visit from Bh&imacr;ma, who suggests that they should all accompany the aged Brahmin and his family to their destination, and with a verse in praise of Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u the piece ends.

<p>Gha&tdotb;otkaca is again the leading figure of the <hi>D&umacr;tagha&tdotb;otkaca</hi>, which may also be classed as a Vy&amacr;yoga, a term indicating primarily a military spectacle. The Kurus are jubilant over the defeat of Abhimanyu, Arjuna&apos;s son, at the hands of Jayadratha, though Dh&rdotb;tar&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;ra warns them of the dangers that overshadow them. Gha&tdotb;otkaca appears to them and predicts their punishment at the hands of Arjuna. Of the same general type apparently is the <hi>Kar&ndotb;abh&amacr;ra</hi> which deals with Kar&ndotb;a&apos;s armour; he makes himself ready for his fight with Arjuna, and tells Çalya, the Madra king, of the trick by which he won it from the great Paraçur&amacr;ma, though the latter retaliated for the deception by the curse that the arms should fail him in the hour of his need. The curse is fulfilled, for Indra comes in the guise of a Brahmin and obtains from Kar&ndotb;a his weapons and earrings. Kar&ndotb;a and Çalya go out to battle, and the sound of Arjuna&apos;s chariot is heard. In the <hi>&Umacr;rubha&nmacr;ga</hi> the fight between Bh&imacr;ma and Duryodhana, greatest of the Kurus, ends in the breaking of the thigh of the latter, who falls in agony; his son comes to him in his childish way, but his father is fain to save him the sorrow of his plight. His parents and wives surround him; he seeks to comfort them; Açvatth&amacr;man swears vengeance despite his counsels of peace; visions of his brothers and Apsarases float before him, and he passes away.

<p>These four plays have each but one Act; the <hi>Pañcar&amacr;tra</hi>, on the other hand, has three, and may perhaps be classed as a <pb n=97 id=pb97 facs="f:097">Samavak&amacr;ra, in so far at least as it is a drama in which there are more heroes of sorts than one, and they more or less attain their ends, which seem to be the chief features of that dubious kind of play in the theory. It reflects the period when efforts are being made to save the Kurus and the P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;avas from the fatal conflict, which ends in the ruin of the former and grave loss to the latter. Dro&ndotb;a has undertaken a sacrifice for Duryodhana, and seeks as the fee the grant to the P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;avas of half the realm to which they had a just claim. Duryodhana promises on condition that they are heard of within five days. Vir&amacr;&tdotb;a, however, is missing from those present at the offering; he has to mourn the loss of a hundred<note n=1 id=n97.1>One in the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;rata</hi>, but Bh&imacr;ma slays there 105 S&umacr;tas also, the original K&imacr;caka being of that class.</note> K&imacr;cakas. Bh&imacr;&sdotb;ma suspects that Bh&imacr;ma must be at the bottom of this illhap, and on his instigation at the end of Act II it is decided to raid Vir&amacr;&tdotb;a&apos;s cows, as he hopes thus to bring the facts to light. The foray, however, fails, for the P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;avas are with Vir&amacr;&tdotb;a in disguise; Abhimanyu is taken prisoner and married to Vir&amacr;&tdotb;a&apos;s daughter. The charioteer in Act III brings back the news, showing clearly that Arjuna and Bh&imacr;ma have taken part in the contest, but none the less Duryodhana decides to keep faith.

<p>The <hi>D&umacr;tav&amacr;kya</hi>, a Vy&amacr;yoga in one act, is again from the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;rata</hi>, but deals with the K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a legend. Bh&imacr;&sdotb;ma is made chief of the Kuru forces; the arrival of N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a is announced, but Duryodhana forbids that any honour be shown to him, and seats himself before a picture, in which is depicted the indignity shown to Draupad&imacr;, when her husband gambled her away at dice. K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a enters, making a deep impression on all by his majesty; even Duryodhana falls from his seat. The messenger demands the half of the realm for the P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;avas; Duryodhana refuses and seeks to bind the envoy. Enraged, he calls for his magic weapons, but finally he consents to lay aside his wrath, and receives the homage of Dh&rdotb;tar&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;ra. It is interesting to note that the play, in describing the picture, omits any allusion to the miracle by which in the epic K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a himself is represented as providing the unhappy Draupad&imacr; with fresh raiment as soon as each garment is dragged from her in insult. But it would be extremely unwise to assume with Professor Winternitz<note n=2 id=n97.2>KF. pp. 301 f.</note> that this <pb n=98 id=pb98 facs="f:098">fact proves that Bh&amacr;sa did not know of this episode, and that it was interpolated after his time in the epic. Obviously it would have ruined the effect of the picture if such a fact had been hinted at in it, apart from the difficulty of exhibiting this by the painter&apos;s art, and Bh&amacr;sa is clearly justified on artistic grounds in allowing this episode to be passed over.

<p>Of far greater importance is the <hi>B&amacr;lacarita</hi>,<note n=1 id=n98.1>Winternitz, ZDMG. lxxiv. 125 ff.; Lindenau, BS. pp. 22 ff.</note> which presents us with a lively and vivid picture of the feats of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, culminating in the slaying of Ka&ndota;sa, a brilliant exemplification of the value of Patañjali&apos;s evidence as to the growth of drama. The director enters, pronounces a verse of benediction asking the favour of the god, who is N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u, R&amacr;ma, and K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a in the four ages of the world; he announces the advent of the sage N&amacr;rada and retires. N&amacr;rada explains that he has come from the heaven to gaze on the young K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, born in the family of the V&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;is as son of Devak&imacr; and Vasudeva, who is in truth N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a incarnate to destroy Ka&ndota;sa. He sees the infant, pays homage, and departs. Devak&imacr; and Vasudeva appear on the stage; they have joy in the birth of a son, but terror, for Ka&ndota;sa has slain already six sons of theirs and will slay the seventh&mdash;a deviation in number from our other sources which make K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a the eighth child. Vasudeva takes the infant and decides to remove it from Ka&ndota;sa&apos;s reach. He leaves the city, but the child&apos;s weight is as colossal as that of Mount Mandara; the darkness is impenetrable, but a marvellous light comes from the child, and the Yamun&amacr; makes dry a path for him to cross. The spirit of the tree under which he rests brings to him the cowherd Nanda, bearing a dead maiden, an infant just borne by his wife Yaçod&amacr;, who, fallen in a faint, does not know whether the child is a boy or a girl. Nanda gives aid reluctantly, but in memory of past favours. He seeks first to purify himself from contact with the dead, but a spring of water shoots forth and renders labour needless. He takes the boy, but his weight proves too great. Now appear in the guise of herdsmen the weapons of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a and his steed, who present themselves each with a verse, &lsquo;I am the bird, Garu&ddotb;a,&rsquo; &amp;c., &lsquo;I am the discus&rsquo;, &lsquo;I the bow&rsquo;, &lsquo;I the club&rsquo;, &lsquo;I the conch&rsquo;, and &lsquo;I the sword&rsquo;. At the request of the discus the infant consents to become light, and Nanda bears him away. Vasudeva finds the dead child awakened <pb n=99 id=pb99 facs="f:099">to life in his arms, and the weight of it is oppressive, but the Yamun&amacr; once more gives dry passage, and he returns to Mathur&amacr; and Devak&imacr;. Act II opens with an entr&apos;acte in Ka&ndota;sa&apos;s palace. The curse pronounced on him by the seer Madhuka enters, guised as a Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;la in hateful form with a necklace of skulls; he and his retinue of Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;l&imacr;s force their way into the heart of the palace; the royal fortune, R&amacr;jaçr&imacr;, would bar their way, but the curse announces that it is Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u&apos;s will that he enter, and she yields; the curse seizes then hold of Ka&ndota;sa. The Act then presents Ka&ndota;sa uneasy and distressed by the portents of the night; he summons his astrologer and his domestic priests, who warn him that the portents presage the birth of a god. Ka&ndota;sa has Vasudeva summoned, is told of the birth of a daughter, refuses to spare the child, and hurls it against a rock. But part only of the lifeless body falls to earth; the rest rises to heaven, and the dread figure of the goddess K&amacr;rty&amacr;yan&imacr; appears to the king. Her retinue come also, announcing each his advent with a verse, and declare their purpose to destroy Ka&ndota;sa. In the meantime, in herdsmen&apos;s guise they will go to the home of the child to share in the sports of the herdsmen.

<p>The entr&apos;acte before Act III tells us in the mouths of the herdsmen of their joys since K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a came to live with them, and an old man relates in a long Pr&amacr;krit speech his wonderful deeds, including the destruction of the demons, P&umacr;tan&amacr;, Çaka&tdotb;a, Yamala and Arjuna, Pralamba, Dhenuka, and Keçin. We are told then that K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a or D&amacr;modara, the name won from an adventure, has gone to the V&rdotb;nd&amacr; wood for the Hall&imacr;çaka dance; the dance is performed by D&amacr;modara, his friends, and the maidens, to the music of the drum and to song. The advent of the demon Ari&sdotb;&tdotb;a is announced; D&amacr;modara bids the maidens and herdsmen mount a hill, and watch the struggle. It proves unequal; the bull demon recognizes the superiority of his foe, and that he is Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u himself, and meets death with resignation. The victory accomplished, the news is brought of a new danger, the snake K&amacr;liya has appeared on the Yamun&amacr; bank, menacing cows and Brahmins. Act IV shows us the maidens seeking to restrain K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a from the new struggle, but he persists and overcomes the demon, plunging into the waters to grapple with him. He brings him out, learns that he had entered the waters in fear of Garu&ddotb;a <pb n=100 id=pb100 facs="f:100">who slays snakes at pleasure, makes him promise to spare cows and Brahmins, and puts on him a mark that Garu&ddotb;a must respect. A herald then enters to challenge D&amacr;modara and his brother Balar&amacr;ma to the festival of the boys at Mathur&amacr;.

<p>Act V shows us Ka&ndota;sa plotting the overthrow of the youths. A herald reports the arrival of D&amacr;modara, and his great feats of strength, the mocking of the elephant let loose on him, the making straight of a female dwarf, the breaking of the bow of the guardsman. The king orders at once the boxing to begin; K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, however, easily overcomes Mu&sdotb;&tdotb;ika and C&amacr;&ndotb;&umacr;ra, the king&apos;s chosen champions, and completes his victory by a sudden onslaught which leaves the king dead. His soldiers would avenge him, but Vasudeva announces K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a&apos;s identity with Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u, and appoints Ugrasena king in Ka&ndota;sa&apos;s place, freeing him from the confinement in which his son had placed him. N&amacr;rada with Apsarases and Gandharvas appears to glorify K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, who graciously permits N&amacr;rada to return to heaven, and a benediction, spoken apparently by the actor, closes the play.

<p>The precise source of the drama is unknown; it differs in detail widely from the stories of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a in the <hi>Hariva&ndota;ça</hi>, <hi>Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u</hi>, and <hi>Bh&amacr;gavata Pur&amacr;&ndotb;as</hi>, but none of these works, as we have it, is probably older than Bh&amacr;sa. The erotic element, which is so closely associated with K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a in later tradition, is lacking here as in the <hi>Hariva&ndota;ça</hi> and the <hi>Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u Pur&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi>, and similarly the figure of R&amacr;dh&amacr; is missing.

<p>The merits of the <hi>B&amacr;lacarita</hi> are not reproduced in Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s treatment of the other chief Avat&amacr;ra of Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u. The <hi>Pratim&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi> shows us the death of Daçaratha, when he realizes the departure of R&amacr;ma, deprived of his inheritance by Kaikey&imacr;&apos;s wiles, with S&imacr;t&amacr; and Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a into the forest; his statue is added to those of his predecessors in the statue (<hi>pratim&amacr;</hi>) hall. Bharata returns from a visit, learns of the news, pursues R&amacr;ma, but is induced to return to rule, bearing with him R&amacr;ma&apos;s shoes as token that he regards himself but as viceroy. R&amacr;ma decides to offer the sacrifice for the dead for his sire; R&amacr;va&ndotb;a appears under the guise of an expert, and bids him offer a golden antelope, by this device securing R&amacr;ma&apos;s absence when S&imacr;t&amacr; is stolen by him, slaying Ja&tdotb;&amacr;yu who seeks to protect her. R&amacr;ma goes to Ki&sdotb;kindh&amacr;, and makes alliance with Sugr&imacr;va against V&amacr;lin. Bharata <pb n=101 id=pb101 facs="f:101">learns that Kaikey&imacr;&apos;s ruse had been induced by the curse of an ascetic, whose son Daçaratha had unwittingly slain, and that she had but meant to ask for a banishment of fourteen days, but had by a slip said years. He sends his army to aid R&amacr;ma, who ultimately defeats R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, and recovers S&imacr;t&amacr;. He brings her with him to Janasth&amacr;na, where he is begged to resume his kingdom; all then go by the magic car Pu&sdotb;pak to Ayodhy&amacr;. The seven acts of the play are matched by the six of the <hi>Abhi&sdotb;ekan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>,<note n=1 id=n101.1>Trs. E. Beccarini-Crescenzi, GSAI. xxvii. 1 ff.</note> the drama of the consecration of R&amacr;ma which follows, like its predecessor, the <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>. It tells of V&amacr;lin&apos;s death at the hands of R&amacr;ma; Hanumant&apos;s success in reaching La&nmacr;k&amacr; and in comforting S&imacr;t&amacr; and affronting R&amacr;va&ndotb;a. Vibh&imacr;&sdotb;a&ndotb;a advises the coercion of the ocean to attain a passage for the army; R&amacr;va&ndotb;a vainly seeks to win S&imacr;t&amacr;, showing her in appearance the heads of R&amacr;ma and Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a, but she repudiates his advances; he is compelled to fight, and the play ends with R&amacr;ma&apos;s coronation. The epic apparently has weighed too heavily on the author, whose resource in incident is remarkable by its absence.

<p>A far more favourable opportunity is afforded to Bh&amacr;sa when he derived his story from the Kath&amacr; literature,<note n=2 id=n101.2>Cf. KSS. cxii. and <hi>K&amacr;mas&umacr;travy&amacr;khy&amacr;</hi> in ed. of <hi>Pratim&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, Upodgh&amacr;ta, p. 29, n.; trs. GSAI. xxviii.</note> as is doubtless the case in the <hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi>, a drama in six acts. The daughter of king Kuntibhoja, the young Kura&nmacr;g&imacr;, is saved from an elephant by an unknown youth, who, in reality son of the Sauv&imacr;ra king, is with his father living as a member of a degraded caste for a year, as the outcome of a curse. His low status forbids his aspiring to the princess, but love triumphs, and the maidens of Kura&nmacr;g, arrange a secret meeting to which the youth comes in the guise of a thief. But the news leaks out and he must fly; in despair of reunion he seeks death in the fire, but Agni repulses him; he would have thrown himself from a rock, but a Vidy&amacr;dhara dissuades him, giving him a ring which enables him unseen to re-enter the palace and save Kura&nmacr;g&imacr;, likewise desolated, from suicide. The way for a happy issue from the impasse is found by the fact that N&amacr;rada reveals the true history of Avim&amacr;raka; he is not in fact the son of the Sauv&imacr;ra king; he is the son of the god Agni by Sudarçan&amacr;, the wife of the king of K&amacr;çi, who <pb n=102 id=pb102 facs="f:102">gave him over on his birth to Sucetan&amacr;, her sister, wife of the Sauv&imacr;ra king. The marriage thus takes place with the approval of all those connected with the pair.

<p>Equally from the Kath&amacr; literature, and in this case from a source known to us, the <hi>B&rdotb;hatkath&amacr;</hi> of Gu&ndotb;&amacr;&ddotb;hya, which, written in Paiç&amacr;c&imacr; Pr&amacr;krit has vanished, but is preserved in a version from Nepal and two from Kashmir, is the subject of the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>,<note n=1 id=n102.1>The story is referred to in the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>, ii. 92; for the Kath&amacr;, see Lacôte, <hi><corr sic=Le>La</corr> <corr sic="B&rdotb;ha&tdotb;kath&amacr;">B&rdotb;hatkath&amacr;</corr></hi>, pp. 70 ff.; for the &lsquo;Trojan horse&rsquo; motif, GIL. ii. 155; iii. 175, n. 3.</note> styled in the prologue a Prakara&ndotb;a, which has four Acts and resembles in part that form of drama as recognized by the theory, though its hero is the minister of Udayana, the Vatsa king. The latter goes on an elephant hunt, armed with his lyre to charm his prey, but is taken prisoner by a clever trick of his enemy, Pradyota Mah&amacr;sena, of Ujjayin&imacr;, a counterfeit elephant being employed for his overthrow. Yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a determines to revenge the king. In Ujjayin&imacr; Mah&amacr;sena discusses with his wife the question of the marriage of their daughter V&amacr;savadatt&amacr;, when the news of the capture of Udayana arrives. They decide that she shall take lessons in music from the captive, and, not unnaturally, the two fall in love. Yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a comes to Ujjayin&imacr; in disguise with his friends, and through his machinations the king is enabled to escape with V&amacr;savadatt&amacr;, though the minister is himself, after a gallant fight, captured. Mah&amacr;sena, however, appreciated the minister&apos;s cleverness, and has the marriage of the pair depicted.<note n=2 id=n102.2>The work is styled a N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr; in the colophon in one manuscript.</note>

<p>The play is criticized severely, though not by name, by Bh&amacr;maha,<note n=3 id=n102.3>iv. 40 ff.</note> on the score that Udayana could never have been deceived by an artificial elephant, and if deceived his life would not have been spared by the enemy forces. The contentions are obviously of little value in this form; the essence, of course, is that such an incident which may pass in a tale seems too childish for a drama, but, if this troubles us, we may console ourselves with the reflexion that the trees were thick, and Udayana ardent in the chase. V&amacr;mana<note n=4 id=n102.4>v. 2. 28.</note> cites the end of verse 3 in Act IV which occurs also in the <hi>Arthaç&amacr;stra</hi>,<note n=5 id=n102.5>p. 366.</note> a work which need not be older than Bh&amacr;sa, and may be a good deal later.

<pb n=103 id=pb103 facs="f:103"><p>The <hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi>,<note n=1 id=n103.1><corr sic=Tis.>Trs.</corr> A. Baston, Paris, 1914 (corr. in GSAI. xxvii. 159 f.); A. G. Shirreff and Panna Lall, Allahabad, 1918. Cf. Lacôte, JA. sér. <hi rend=sc>II</hi>, xiii. 493 ff.</note> or the <hi>Svapnan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, in six Acts forms in substance the continuation of the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>. The minister is anxious to secure for Udayana an extension of his power by wedding him to Padm&amacr;vat&imacr;, daughter of the king of Magadha. But Udayana will not leave his beloved V&amacr;savadatt&amacr;, so that strategy is needed. The minister induces V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; to aid in his scheme, and, taking advantage of a temporary separation, he spreads the rumour that the queen and he have perished in a conflagration. The king is thus induced to consider marriage with Padm&amacr;vat&imacr;, in whose care the minister has entrusted the queen, giving out that she is his sister. Padm&amacr;vat&imacr; is willing to accept the love of the king, but, learning that he has never ceased to cherish the memory of his beloved, she is seized by a severe headache, and the king comes to comfort her. He does not find her, and lies down, sleep overcoming him; V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; who had come to aid Padm&amacr;vat&imacr; sits down beside the sleeping form which she mistakes for that of her new mistress, but, as he begins to speak in his sleep she rises and leaves him, but not before he has caught a glimpse of her, in a dream as he thinks. He is summoned to the palace, and finds the good news that his foes have been defeated, and a messenger has come from Mah&amacr;sena and his wife to console him, bearing the picture of the nuptials of himself and V&amacr;savadatt&amacr;. Padm&amacr;vat&imacr; recognizes in the lady the features of the sister left in her care by Yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, who arrives to explain to the satisfaction of all the plan he has devised to secure Udayana&apos;s ends.

<p>The fame of the work in R&amacr;jaçekhara&apos;s time is attested, and already before him the imaginary conflagration of the queen had excited the imitation of Har&sdotb;a in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>; V&amacr;mana<note n=2 id=n103.2>iv. 3. 25, citing iv. 7.</note> cites from it, and Abhinavagupta<note n=3 id=n103.3><hi>Dhvany&amacr;lokalocana</hi>, p. 152 cites probably a lost verse; comm. on N. in TSS. ed. p. xxii. The play is cited also by Vandyagha&tdotb;&imacr;ya Sarv&amacr;nanda (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1159).</note> knew it. Nor is there any doubt that it is the poet&apos;s masterpiece and the most mature of his dramas. Great promise, however, in a different vein is shown in the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi>, of which we have only a fragment in four <pb n=104 id=pb104 facs="f:104">Acts without beginning or final verses. C&amacr;rudatta, a merchant whose generosity has impoverished him, has seen a hetaera Vasantasen&amacr; at a festival, and they have fallen in love. Pursued by the king&apos;s brother-in-law, Sa&mdota;sth&amacr;na, Vasantasen&amacr; takes refuge in C&amacr;rudatta&apos;s house, and, when she goes, she leaves in his care her gold ornaments. She generously ransoms from his creditors a former servant of C&amacr;rudatta, who then renounces the world and becomes a monk. In the night the ornaments, which she had deposited, are stolen by a thief Sajjalaka who breaks into C&amacr;rudatta&apos;s house, in order to gain the means to purchase the freedom of a slave of the hetaera with whom he is in love. C&amacr;rudatta is overcome with shame at learning of the theft of goods deposited in his care, and his noble wife sacrifices a pearl necklace, which she gives to the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka to hand over to Vasantasen&amacr; in lieu of her lost jewels. He takes it to the hetaera, who has learned of the theft, but accepts it to have the excuse of visiting the merchant once more. She therefore hands over the slave girl to Sajjalaka, and starts out to C&amacr;rudatta&apos;s house. At this point the play ends abruptly, but it seems as if C&amacr;rudatta were accused of theft, and that Vasantasen&amacr; herself is in grave danger of her life.

<p>A verse of this play is cited by V&amacr;mana<note n=1 id=n104.1>i. 2 in V&amacr;mana, v. i. 3.</note> and another,<note n=2 id=n104.2>i. 19.</note> found also in the <hi>B&amacr;lacarita</hi><note n=3 id=n104.3>i. 15.</note> and the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>,<note n=4 id=n104.4>i. 34.</note> is quoted by Da&ndotb;&ddotb;in in the <hi>K&amacr;vy&amacr;darça</hi>.<note n=5 id=n104.5>ii. 233.</note> We need not doubt that Bh&amacr;sa is his source, especially as there is possibly elsewhere in the <hi>K&amacr;vy&amacr;darça</hi> an allusion to the dream scene of the <hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi> and its sequel. The <hi>Daridrac&amacr;rudatta</hi> mentioned by Abhinavagupta is most probably the same work. From it are derived the first four Acts of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>.<note n=6 id=n104.6>G. Morgenstierne, <hi lang=de>Über das Verhältnis zwischen C&amacr;rudatta und M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> (1921). Cf. Mehendale, <hi>Bhandarkar Comm. Vol.</hi> pp. 369 ff.</note> The source of the drama is not certain; we have the motif of the love of a merchant and a hetaera elsewhere, but not with the special developments given by Bh&amacr;sa.

<p>Verses attributed to Bh&amacr;sa are also found which are not contained in the extant dramas, so that, even allowing for misquotation and confusion, it is probable that he may have written <pb n=105 id=pb105 facs="f:105">further plays, or he may have illustrated the book of the dramatic art which he is credited with writing,<note n=1 id=n105.1><hi>Arthadyotanik&amacr;</hi>, 2.</note> by inserting examples of his own composition. Why his plays should have fared so badly as to disappear from popular use apparently for centuries does not appear. The most plausible view is that he was a poet of the south, and that his dramas suffered from the general Mahomedan objection to everything Hindu, and especially to the dramas of an earnest devotee of Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u such as Bh&amacr;sa was. But this is mere conjecture.


<div2 id=ch4.4 n=4>
<head><ab type=divNum>4.</ab> <hi>Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s Art and Technique</hi></head>

<p>The number of Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s dramas, and the variety of their themes, indicate the activity and originality of his talent. Even the limitations imposed by the choice of epic subjects are often successfully surmounted. In the R&amacr;ma dramas only is there lacking any sign of his ability; the <hi>Abhi&sdotb;ekan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi> is a somewhat dreary summary of the corresponding books (IV&ndash;VI) of the <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, nor is the <hi>Pratim&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi> substantially superior. The variations are in the main few and unimportant; the two struggles between Sugr&imacr;va and V&amacr;lin are condensed into one, which leaves the treacherous slaying of V&amacr;lin without shadow of excuse, and casts a blemish on R&amacr;ma&apos;s character which later dramatists avoid. The pathetic scene of the epic in which T&amacr;r&amacr;, his wife, laments V&amacr;lin&apos;s death is omitted, V&amacr;lin forbidding any woman to gaze on him in his fall. The two efforts of R&amacr;va&ndotb;a to deceive S&imacr;t&amacr;, first by showing her R&amacr;ma&apos;s head, and later R&amacr;ma and Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a bound and seemingly dead, are reduced to one, the showing of the heads of both, and S&imacr;t&amacr;&apos;s constancy is made inhuman by denying her the comfort of a consoler. To secure a happy ending, Agni is made to vindicate S&imacr;t&amacr; by the test of fire, and to hand her over to R&amacr;ma as Lak&sdotb;m&imacr; and his fit mate. The characters remain stereotyped and dull; R&amacr;va&ndotb;a is nothing more than a <hi lang=la>miles gloriosus</hi>, if not comic, and Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a cuts a very poor figure.<note n=2 id=n105.2>In the <hi>Pratim&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi> the poet invents the episode of Bharata&apos;s learning of S&imacr;t&amacr;&apos;s abduction, of R&amacr;ma&apos;s taking over the reins of government from Bharata, and his coronation in the hermitage. In the <hi>Pañcar&amacr;tra</hi> the gift by Duryodhana of half the realm is new.</note>

<p>The pieces based on the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;rata</hi> shows more invention <pb n=106 id=pb106 facs="f:106">and interest. The <hi>Madhyamavy&amacr;yoga</hi> exploits neatly the theme of Hi&ddotb;imb&amacr;&apos;s longing to see her husband of many years before, and the obedience of a son to a mother exemplified both by Gha&tdotb;otkaca and by Madhyama; a mother&apos;s bidding outweighs even that of a father. The struggle of father against son, both unknowing, is original, though not tragic. In the <hi>Kar&ndotb;abh&amacr;ra</hi> the nobility of the haughty Kar&ndotb;a is emphasized; in the epic he surrenders his armour to Indra, but demands a price, the lance that never fails; in the play it suffices the prince that he has conferred a boon on the god himself. There is the same martial spirit, evoking the sentiment of heroism in the audience, in the <hi>D&umacr;tagha&tdotb;otkaca</hi> where the joy of the Kurus is contrasted effectively with the doubts of Dh&rdotb;tar&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;ra, and the grave warning which Gha&tdotb;otkaca brings of the revenge to be wreaked by Arjuna for his son&apos;s death. The <hi>D&umacr;tav&amacr;kya</hi> is admirable in his contrast between the character of Duryodhana and the majesty of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a; the picture motif is effectively elaborated, and the deep admiration of the poet for K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a as the embodiment of the highest of gods Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u, of whom he was an adorer, is plainly manifest. In the <hi>&Umacr;rubha&nmacr;ga</hi> Duryodhana&apos;s hauteur to the highest of gods meets with its just punishment; Duryodhana is the chief subject, but not the hero, of the piece which manifests the just<note n=1 id=n106.1>Recognized by Duryodhana, v. 35.</note> punishment of the impious. The death of Duryodhana is admirably depicted; his child who loved to sit on his knees comes to him, but must be repulsed; the touch that brought joy aforetime would now be an agony.<note n=2 id=n106.2>v. 43.</note> But Duryodhana, with all his demerits as a man, remains heroic in his death.

<p>The <hi>B&amacr;lacarita</hi> reveals the originality of Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s genius; the entr&apos;acte to the second Act is extremely effective in its terrors, and the poet has no hesitation in asking the audience to conceive for themselves the strange figures of the attendants of Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u or the host of the goddess K&amacr;rty&amacr;yan&imacr;, or the bull Ari&sdotb;&tdotb;a, or the snake demon K&amacr;liya, all of whom appear on the stage, but doubtless in costumes which left most to the mind&apos;s eye. The miracles of the light emanating from the child K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, the crossing of the Yamun&amacr;, and the water springing from the ground, are innovations on the tradition, as is the apparent death and revival of the child of Yaçod&amacr;. K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a is heroism incarnate, Ka&ndota;sa <pb n=107 id=pb107 facs="f:107">without merit, and his slaying just, but the heroic sentiment is blended with the erotic, and with that of wonder. As a drama, however, the play suffers unquestionably from the wholly undeniable disparity between the two opponents; K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a is never in danger, and his feats are too easily achieved to produce their full effect.

<p>The <hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi> is a drama of love, primitive in its expression and intensity; Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s love for rapid action is here, as always, strongly marked, as is also his willingness to repeat incidents and situations; the hero twice seeks suicide, and the heroine does so once. The dénouement is artificial, though something of the kind was necessary to secure the possibility of the marriage of the pair. There is a far more interesting hint of youthful love in the amours of Udayana and V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; in the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, where the rapidity of action is in entire harmony with the skill attributed to the minister, whose address, courage, and loyalty, make him an attractive figure. The <hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi> itself reveals Udayana as a faithful and devoted husband, very different from the careless if courteous gentleman of Har&sdotb;a&apos;s dramas. His love for the queen he imagines lost ennobles and elevates his character, while motives of statecraft and the affection shown him by Padm&amacr;vat&imacr; easily explain his wooing of that maiden. V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; herself is not the jealous if high-minded wife of Har&sdotb;a&apos;s plays; she is the devoted and self-sacrificing lover who is willing to postpone her own feelings and wishes to the good of her husband. The king and queen are the finest products of Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s characterization of lovers. In the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi>, however, we have clever studies in the hetaera, the merchant and the minor figures, though the value of the play must seem less to us than when completed and elaborated in the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>.

<p>Bh&amacr;sa undoubtedly excels in suggesting heroism; this characteristic is admirably depicted in Yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, and above all in Duryodhana, who <corr sic=is>in</corr> the <hi>D&umacr;tagha&tdotb;otkaca</hi> effectively replies to the menaces of the envoy by promising an answer in deeds<corr>,</corr> war, not in harsh words. But his power is not confined to heroism, love, pathos, or the marvellous. The Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka in his hands attains the characteristics which mark him in the later drama, and, though much was doubtless traditional, it may <pb n=108 id=pb108 facs="f:108">safely be assumed that he tended by his example to stereotype the figure. In the <hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi><note n=1 id=n108.1>p. 69 and v. 21.</note> he distinguishes himself by devotion to his master; he is set on finding him, dead or alive, when he is missing, and he is prepared if need be to follow him beyond the grave. Avim&amacr;raka himself portrays the character of his friend; he places first, doubtless deliberately, the amusement he produces in social intercourse (<hi>go&sdotb;&tdotb;h&imacr;&sdotb;u h&amacr;sya&hdotb;</hi>), but he describes him also as brave in battle, a wise friend, a comforter in sorrow, a violent foe to his enemies. If in the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi><note n=2 id=n108.2>iii. p. 53.</note> he seems to abandon the idea of succouring his master, it is only because he is convinced <corr sic=thst>that</corr> Vatsa is dead, and that nothing can be done to save him. The other side of his character is his devotion to the pleasures of the table and his feeble attempts at wit and humour. V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; he remembers fondly because she used to see that he never lacked sweetmeats.<note n=3 id=n108.3><hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi>, iv. p. 43.</note> When in the <hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi><note n=4 id=n108.4>v. p. 83.</note> the heroine weeps in love-sorrow, he would like to weep also in sympathy; but no tears come, and he recalls that, even when his own father died, he could hardly weep. When addressed as a man, he insists that he is a woman. He is, however, a Brahmin in his prejudices; he will not drink brandy, a pleasure which he permits to the G&amacr;trasevaka, the disguise assumed by one of Yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a&apos;s following in the attempt to rescue Udayana. This worthy favours us with a eulogy of drink, which is an interesting fragment of the drinking songs which must have existed in ancient India:<note n=5 id=n108.5><hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, p. 57.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn type=Group>
    <l><hi>dha&ndotb;&ndotb;&amacr; sur&amacr;hi matt&amacr; dha&ndotb;&ndotb;&amacr; sur&amacr;hi a&ndotb;ulitt&amacr;;</hi>
    <l><hi>dha&ndotb;&ndotb;&amacr; sur&amacr;hi h&ndotb;&amacr;d&amacr; dha&ndotb;&ndotb;&amacr; sur&amacr;hi sa&mdota;ñavid&amacr;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Blessed those that are drunk with drink, blessed those that are soaked with drink; blessed those that are washed with drink, blessed those that are choked with drink.&rsquo; Amusing also is the figure of Yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a as an Unmattaka, devoted to eating and dancing, and of Ruma&ndotb;vant in his guise of a Çrama&ndotb;aka. There is genuine humour in the scene in the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi><note n=6 id=n108.6>pp. 59 ff.</note> between the G&amacr;trasevaka and the servant, when the former makes ready the elephant Bhadravat&imacr;, which is to be <pb n=109 id=pb109 facs="f:109">the means of carrying off the king and V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; beyond the reach of all pursuit, without raising any suspicion on the part of the entourage of Mah&amacr;sena. Quiet humour is shown in the episode of the bringing of Bh&imacr;ma by Gha&tdotb;otkaca to his mother Hi&ddotb;imb&amacr;; Gha&tdotb;otkaca has difficulty in describing his victim, and is much amazed to find his mother, whose curiosity is aroused by his lack of precision, finding him to be his deity and hers in his capacity as husband and father.<note n=1 id=n109.1><hi>Madhyamavy&amacr;yoga</hi>, p. 22.</note> In the same vein is the compliment paid by R&amacr;ma to S&imacr;t&amacr;, when the latter accurately predicts the action he would take when his father offered him the throne: &lsquo;Thou hast guessed well; few pairs are there of like character in the world (<hi lang=sa-Latn>su&sdotb;&tdotb;hu tarkitam alpa&mdota; tulyaç&imacr;l&amacr;ni dvandv&amacr;ni s&rdotb;jyante</hi>)&rsquo;.<note n=2 id=n109.2><hi>Abhi&sdotb;ekan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, i. p. 13.</note> Quite distinctly amusing is the scene at the close of the <hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi>,<note n=3 id=n109.3>vi. p. 102.</note> where the facts of the relationships are being disclosed to the king Kuntibhoja. That sovereign may be justly excused his difficulty in apprehending the situation; he is reduced to such confusion that he is dubious about his own capital Vairantya, but finally, when assured that the hero is the son-in-law of Kuntibhoja, asks who that worthy may be, to be reminded politely that he himself is Kuntibhoja, father of Kura&nmacr;g&imacr;, son of Duryodhana, and lord of Vairantya. This power explains the description of Bh&amacr;sa as the laughter (<hi lang=sa-Latn>h&amacr;sa</hi>) of poetry given to him by Jayadeva in the <hi>Prasannar&amacr;ghava</hi>, a title which is also merited by such verses as one cited in the anthologies,<note n=4 id=n109.4><hi>Subh&amacr;&sdotb;it&amacr;vali</hi>, 1994.</note> though not found in the extant dramas:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>kap&amacr;le m&amacr;rj&amacr;ra&hdotb; paya iti kar&amacr;&ndota;l le&ddotb;hi çaçinas</hi>
    <l><hi>tarucchidraprot&amacr;n bisam iti kar&imacr; sa&mdota;kalayati</hi>
    <l><hi>rat&amacr;nte talpasth&amacr;n harati vanit&amacr;py a&ndota;çukam iti</hi>
    <l><hi>prabh&amacr;mattaç candro jagad idam aho viplavayati.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;When its rays fall on its cheeks the cat licks them, thinking them milk; when they are caught in the cleft of a tree the elephant deems them a lotus; when they rest on the couch of lovers the maiden seizes them, saying, &ldquo;&apos;Tis my robe&rdquo;; the moon in truth, proud of its brilliance, doth lead astray all this world.&rsquo;

<p>Of deeper sentiments we need expect nothing from Bh&amacr;sa; <pb n=110 id=pb110 facs="f:110">in this respect he sets the model for his successors. From K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa he differs in being a devotee of Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u rather than Çiva, but he is equally an admirer of the established Brahminical order. In the <hi>Pañcar&amacr;tra</hi>,<note n=1 id=n110.1>i. 25.</note> the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>,<note n=2 id=n110.2>pp. 43 ff.</note> and in the character of N&amacr;rada in the <hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi>,<note n=3 id=n110.3>pp. 99 ff.</note> we find clearly expressed his appreciation of the high rank of the Brahmin, and the obligations due to him from kings and other classes.

<p>Care in the delineation of even minor characters is normally displayed; the number of these is considerable; sixteen each in the <hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi> and the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, about twenty in the <hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi>, <hi>Abhi&sdotb;ekan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, and <hi>Pañcar&amacr;tra</hi>, twelve in the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi>, and about thirty in the <hi>B&amacr;lacarita</hi>. But there are traces of the anxiety of Bh&amacr;sa to avoid adding needlessly to the number of those appearing; in the <hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi> neither the king of K&amacr;çi nor Sucetan&amacr; appears on the scene despite their part in the play. The silence of S&imacr;t&amacr;, though at the close of the <hi>Abhi&sdotb;ekan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi> she appears on the stage, is doubtless explicable by the same dramatic touch which makes Euripides refuse to assign any words to Alkestis on her return from the dead.

<p>In technique Bh&amacr;sa does not accord entirely with the later rules of the theorists. The <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, it is true, when it forbids the exhibition of battle scenes contradicts itself, and Bh&amacr;sa freely permits them, as must have been the case in the primitive drama in which K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a slew Ka&ndota;sa. The maidens, however, he bids watch the mortal combat of Ari&sdotb;&tdotb;a and K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a from afar. Daçaratha&apos;s death he admits; the bodies of C&amacr;&ndotb;&umacr;ra, Mu&sdotb;&tdotb;ika, and Ka&ndota;sa lie on the stage, and V&amacr;lin perishes there as well as Duryodhana, but all these are evildoers, and their death evokes no sorrow. The same simplicity doubtless accounts for the introduction of the mythological figures of the <hi>B&amacr;lacarita</hi>, whom we need not imagine to have been elaborately costumed; they announce their nature or are described,<note n=4 id=n110.4>Cf. Duryodhana&apos;s description of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a&apos;s manifestation in the <hi>D&umacr;tav&amacr;kya</hi>.</note> and the spectator supplies the imagination requisite to comprehend them.

<p>We find already in Bh&amacr;sa the formal distinction of introductory scenes into Vi&sdotb;kambhakas of two kinds, according as Sanskrit alone or Sanskrit and Pr&amacr;krit are used and Praveçakas; <pb n=111 id=pb111 facs="f:111">in the former the number of interlocutors is three in two<note n=1 id=n111.1><hi>Abhi&sdotb;ekan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, vi, where three Vidy&amacr;dharas describe R&amacr;ma and R&amacr;va&ndotb;a&apos;s fight; <hi>Pañcar&amacr;tra</hi>, i, where three Brahmins describe Duryodhana&apos;s sacrifice.</note> cases against one or two as usual later; there are other signs of his fondness for triads.<note n=2 id=n111.2>In the <hi>Madhyamavy&amacr;yoga</hi> there are three sons of the Brahmin; <hi>&Umacr;rubha&nmacr;ga</hi>, where three servants describe the battle. Cf. the Trigata of the preliminaries to the drama.</note> The introduction normally is styled Sth&amacr;pan&amacr;,<note n=3 id=n111.3>Prast&amacr;van&amacr; is given in the <hi>Kar&ndotb;abh&amacr;ra</hi>.</note> not as later Prast&amacr;van&amacr;, and it is extremely simple; after a N&amacr;nd&imacr;, not preserved, has been pronounced&mdash;perhaps behind the scene&mdash;the director enters, utters a benediction, and is about to make an announcement when a sound is heard which leads up to the actual drama. No mention of the poet&apos;s name or the work is found, but these we may suggest were left to the preliminaries which even in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> were elaborate, and which doubtless were performed before Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s plays, as they were essentially religious rites in honour of the gods. On the other hand, the close, the Bharatav&amacr;kya, of the later theory is varied in Bh&amacr;sa. The conventions as to the use of speech, aloud, aside to another, or to the audience alone are well known, and effective use is made of the voice from the air or behind the scene, as in the <hi>Abhi&sdotb;ekan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, when R&amacr;va&ndotb;a taunts his prisoner and asks, who can set her free when her rescuers are dead; the voice replies, &lsquo;R&amacr;ma, R&amacr;ma&rsquo;.<note n=4 id=n111.4>v. p. 56; cf. <hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi>, iii. p. 41. Compare the use of an abrupt interruption in the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, p. 30, where the query of the king as to a husband is answered by the mention of Vatsar&amacr;ja&apos;s capture.</note>

<p>There are unquestionably primitive traits in Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s art; he uses with dangerous freedom the device by which some one departs and returns straightway, to narrate what must have taken long to happen; thus in the <hi>Abhi&sdotb;ekan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, Ça&nmacr;kukar&ndotb;a is bidden send a thousand men against Hanumant; he departs at once, to return and tell that they have fallen. Free use is made also, as in the epic, of magic weapons in the conflict, as in the battle of Duryodhana and K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a in the <hi>D&umacr;tav&amacr;kya</hi>. So also in the <hi>Madhyamavy&amacr;yoga</hi> we find Gha&tdotb;otkaca employing his magic power to produce water from a rock; then he binds Bh&imacr;ma in a magic noose, from which he is delivered by a magic formula. In the <hi>D&umacr;tav&amacr;kya</hi> the discus of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a <pb n=112 id=pb112 facs="f:112">secures water from the heavenly Ganges by magic means; it has the power to move the mountains of the gods, to set the ocean in motion, and to bring down the stars to earth, ideas which are less unintelligible when we remember the wide-spread Indian beliefs in the powers of magicians, which we find later in Har&sdotb;a&apos;s <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, and which are earlier recorded of those who have attained high degrees of intuition in both the Upani&sdotb;ads and Buddhism. In the <hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi> we have the magic ring of the Vidy&amacr;dhara playing a decisive part in the action, since by its use the hero can enter unseen the harem and visit his wife Kura&nmacr;g&imacr; in secret. It is clear that both in the epic and in the popular tale Bh&amacr;sa found adequate precedent for the stress laid on these means of evoking in his audience the sentiment of wonder.

<p>The use of the dance as an ornament to the drama which is seen in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa is frequently resorted to in Bh&amacr;sa. In Act III of the <hi>B&amacr;lacarita</hi> there is a performance of the Hall&imacr;çaka dance, in which both the herdsmen and the cowherdesses take full part; the dance is accompanied by music and song, and the maidens are gaily attired. A similar dance is mentioned in Act II of the <hi>Pañcar&amacr;tra</hi>,<note n=1 id=n112.1>p. 22. Apparently a dance on the occasion of an eclipse may be meant; Lindenau, BS. p. 43. Cf. L. von Schroeder, <hi lang=de>Arische Religion</hi>, ii. 114 ff.</note> a reflex no doubt of the ritual dance of the winter solstice in the Mah&amacr;vrata rite. It is conceivable also that the conception in the <hi>B&amacr;lacarita</hi> of the appearance of Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u&apos;s weapons as figures on the stage in the dress of herdsmen is a reminiscence of a cult dance in honour of Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u, but this idea must not be pressed unduly, for the poet there invents also the figures of the Curse and the King&apos;s Fortune as <hi lang=la>personae dramatis</hi>. There is, it is clear, a certain similarity between the personification of these abstractions and the allegorical figures of the Buddhist drama, which come again into being in the <hi>Prabodhacandrodaya</hi> of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;amiçra. Song as an important element in the drama again appears in the <hi>Abhi&sdotb;ekan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, where the Gandharvas and Apsarases sing the praises of Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u.<note n=2 id=n112.2>The idea that <hi>prathamakalpa</hi> is a technical term of dramaturgy (DR. i. 60, comm.) appears to be due to the frequent use of the term, apparently as a remark of eulogy, in the manuscripts of Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s works.</note>

<p>There are clear traces in the dramas of the overwhelming influence of epic tradition and of epic recitation in the tendency <pb n=113 id=pb113 facs="f:113">to introduce the description of battle scenes at great length in lieu of dramatic action, while a certain lack of skill is apparent in the attempt to transform the tale into a drama. Thus in the <hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi> the facts essential for a full understanding of the story come out only in the last Act, and the adventures of the hero are there recounted with distinct lack of propriety, as they have formed the subject of the earlier acts of the drama. Neither the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> nor the <hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi> is constructed in so clumsy a manner, but in both cases the working out of the plot is certainly open to criticism. Thus even in the last Act of the latter drama, which in many respects is effective, the stage directions assume that the queen appears on the stage with V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; as her attendant, but that the king either does not see, or does not recognize the latter, both obviously very improbable suppositions; possibly it is assumed that the presence of V&amacr;savadatt&amacr;, though obvious to the audience, is concealed from the king in some manner by the use of the curtain, but this is left to be imagined,<note n=1 id=n113.1>The use of a transverse curtain would explain the scene, but there is no real evidence of this. Cf. chap. xiv. § 1.</note> and it would have been much simpler to invent some ground for securing the entry of V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; by herself later on. On the other hand, in Act I of the play, the facts regarding the supposed death of V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; and the minister in a fire are effectively brought out by the device of using a Brahmac&amacr;rin, who arrives at the hermitage at the same time as Yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a and V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; in their disguise, and tells the tale of the disaster as explaining why he has left that place in sorrow at the event, dilating at the same time on the effect of the news on the unhappy king. The mode in which V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; in Act V mistakes the king for Padm&amacr;vat&imacr; is quite naturally evolved, for the place where he is resting is poorly illuminated and she was naturally unwilling to arouse her mistress from the slumber into which she hoped she had fallen. In Act II of the <hi>Abhi&sdotb;ekan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi> the conversation of Hanumant with S&imacr;t&amacr; is made possible only by the somewhat implausible device of assuming that the R&amacr;k&sdotb;as&imacr;s who guard her fall asleep at their post.

<p>A rather marked fondness is shown by Bh&amacr;sa for the repetition of the same incident. Thus in the <hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi> we have the <pb n=114 id=pb114 facs="f:114">twice repeated attempt of the hero at suicide followed by the attempt of the heroine in the same sense, from which he saves her. At the close of the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> we have again the idea of the attempted suicide of the heroine&apos;s mother, which is obviated by the king&apos;s good sense in showing her that the marriage of the runaway pair was quite proper in their rank and in arranging for marrying them in a painting. The dying V&amacr;lin in the <hi>Abhi&sdotb;ekan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi> has a vision of the Ganges and the other great rivers. Urvaç&imacr; and the Apsarases, and the chariot drawn by a thousand swans, which bears away the dead, coming for his spirit; Duryodhana in the <hi>&Umacr;rubha&nmacr;ga</hi> has a similar vision, and Avim&amacr;raka, when on the point of committing suicide he sees the Vidy&amacr;dhara beside him, imagines that this is a vision such as comes often to dying men. Again in the prologues there is almost a monotonous adoption of the device by which the director is interrupted in making a proposed announcement by a voice from behind the scene, which enables him by a clever transition to lead the audience into the dramatic action proper.


<div2 id=ch4.5 n=5>
<head><ab type=divNum>5.</ab> <hi>Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s Style</hi></head>

<p>The rapidity and directness of the action of Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s plays is reflected in his style. More than any other dramatist, he uses the verse to further the progress of the play, in lieu of devoting it to descriptions rather poetic than directly aiding the drama, and it is characteristic that he freely employs monostichs, which are rare later. On the other hand, he is ready to resort to monologue; that on the third Act of the <hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi> suggested perhaps the monologue of Çarvilaka in the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, whose author must have known Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s works intimately.

<p>The dominating influence on Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s style was clearly that of the epic and in special of V&amacr;lm&imacr;ki, whose great work inevitably impressed itself on the minds of all his successors. The effects are visible not merely in the dramas with epic subject-matter, but extend throughout Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s plays. The results of this influence are all to the good; the necessities of the drama saved Bh&amacr;sa from the one great defect of the epic style, the lack of measure, which permits the <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> to illustrate by twenty-nine similes the sorrows of S&imacr;t&amacr; in her captivity, while in the <pb n=115 id=pb115 facs="f:115"><hi>Abhi&sdotb;ekan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi> the dramatist is content with one. On the other hand he owes to it the relative simplicity of his diction, and his freedom from the excesses of the poetic equivalent of the nominal style, which comes to dominate later Sanskrit literature. The use of long compounds is obviously and plainly undramatic; carried to excess it must have rendered a Sanskrit drama unintelligible even to a highly cultivated audience as far as the verses were concerned, and it is an essential dramatic merit in Bh&amacr;sa that his expression is far easier to follow than in much of later dramatic poetry. He possesses in fact that clearness, which is theoretically a merit of the K&amacr;vya style, but which is signally neglected by the average K&amacr;vya writer in his anxiety to display the complete familiarity which he possesses with every side of the art of poetry. As far as we can judge from the scanty fragments of Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s dramas, that poet was more complex than Bh&amacr;sa, and certainly so in his epics, which aided powerfully in the formation of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s epic and dramatic style.

<p>Bh&amacr;sa, of course, is not in the slightest degree akin to a poet of the people; he is an accomplished master of the art of poetry, but one whose good sense and taste preserve him from adopting in drama the artifices which are permitted in the court epic and lyric which were intended to be studied at leisure. The simple and sententious is beloved of Bh&amacr;sa: thus Kar&ndotb;a repels the objections of Çalya to his parting with armour and earring to the disguised Indra:<note n=1 id=n115.1><hi>Kar&ndotb;abh&amacr;ra</hi>, 22.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>çik&sdotb;&amacr; k&sdotb;aya&mdota; gacchati k&amacr;laparyay&amacr;t: subaddham&umacr;l&amacr; nipatanti p&amacr;dap&amacr;&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>jala&mdota; jalasth&amacr;nagata&mdota; ca çu&sdotb;yati: huta&mdota; ca datta&mdota; ca tathaiva ti&sdotb;&tdotb;hati.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Learning decayeth with the passing of time; though firm their roots, trees fall; the water of a lake drieth up; but sacrifices and gifts endure.&rsquo; When S&imacr;t&amacr; is forced to undergo the ordeal by fire Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a exclaims:<note n=2 id=n115.2><hi>Abhi&sdotb;ekan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, vi. 21.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>vijñ&amacr;ya devy&amacr;ç çauca&mdota; ca çrutv&amacr;c&amacr;ryasya ç&amacr;sanam</hi>
    <l><hi>dharmasneh&amacr;ntare nyast&amacr; buddhir dol&amacr;yate mama.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;I know the queen&apos;s chastity; I have heard the bidding of our preceptor; like a swing, my mind doth move &apos;twixt duty and <pb n=116 id=pb116 facs="f:116">love.&rsquo; When R&amacr;ma falls at his father&apos;s feet on the order being given for his coronation, he tells us:<note n=1 id=n116.1><hi>Pratim&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, i. 6.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>sama&mdota; b&amacr;&sdotb;pe&ndotb;a patat&amacr; tasyopari mam&amacr;py adha&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>pitur me kleditau p&amacr;dau mam&amacr;pi kledita&mdota; çira&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;My father&apos;s feet were wet with tears I let fall on them, and my head was wet with tears he let fall over me.&rsquo; When Devak&imacr; must yield, for the sake of saving it, her child, it is said of her:<note n=2 id=n116.2><hi>B&amacr;lacarita</hi>, i. 13.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>h&rdotb;dayeneha tara&nmacr;gair dvidh&amacr;bh&umacr;teva gacchati</hi>
    <l><hi>yath&amacr; nabhasi toye ca candralekh&amacr; dvidh&amacr; k&rdotb;t&amacr;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;She is divided; her heart remaineth here, her body goeth yonder, as in cloud and water the digit of the moon is divided.&rsquo; R&amacr;va&ndotb;a&apos;s contempt for R&amacr;ma as a foe is forcibly expressed:<note n=3 id=n116.3><hi>Abhi&sdotb;ekan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, iii. 20.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>katha&mdota; lambasata&hdotb; si&ndota;ho m&rdotb;ge&ndotb;a vinip&amacr;tyate</hi>
    <l><hi>gajo v&amacr; sumah&amacr;n matta&hdotb; s&rdotb;g&amacr;lena nihanyate?</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Can the deer bring low the lion with flowing mane? Can the jackal slay the mighty elephant in his wrath?&rsquo; In the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi><note n=4 id=n116.4>i. 20.</note> the darkness is happily described:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>sulabhaçara&ndotb;am &amacr;çrayo bhay&amacr;n&amacr;&mdota;: vanagahana&mdota; timira&mdota; ca tulyam eva</hi>
    <l><hi>ubhayam api hi rak&sdotb;yate &apos;ndhak&amacr;re: janayati yaç ca bhay&amacr;ni yaç ca bh&imacr;ta&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Affording easy refuge, yet abodes of fear, the forest depths and darkness are akin; for the shadows guard alike him who feareth and him who causeth fear.&rsquo; More ambitious is a verse given in the <hi>Subh&amacr;&sdotb;it&amacr;vali</hi>:<note n=5 id=n116.5>v. 1619.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>ka&tdotb;hinah&rdotb;daye muñca krodha&mdota; sukhapratigh&amacr;takam</hi>
    <l><hi>likhati divasa&mdota; y&amacr;ta&mdota; y&amacr;ta&mdota; Yama&hdotb; kila m&amacr;nini</hi>
    <l><hi>vayasi taru&ndotb;e naitad yukta&mdota; cale ca sam&amacr;game</hi>
    <l><hi>bhavati kalaho y&amacr;vat t&amacr;vad vara&mdota; subhage ratam.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Hard-hearted maiden, lay aside the anger that doth impede our joy; death entereth on his register every day as it goeth, disdainful one; not meet is this in thy tender youth, for love is fleeting; rather spend in love the time we lose in this quarrel.&rsquo;

<p>The simple figures of speech are freely used by Bh&amacr;sa, and he shows as usual a marked fondness for the accumulation of similar sounds, as in <hi>sajalajaladhara</hi>, <hi>san&imacr;ran&imacr;rada</hi>, or <hi>kuladaya&mdota; hanti <pb n=117 id=pb117 facs="f:117">madena n&amacr;r&imacr;</hi>: <hi>k&umacr;ladvaya&mdota; k&sdotb;ubdhajal&amacr; nad&imacr;va</hi>. More interesting are instances of his power, which is specially manifest in the <hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi> and the <hi>Pratim&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, of expressing strong emotion adequately and forcibly. Thus we have the indignant upbraiding of Kaikey&imacr; by the angry Bharata:<note n=1 id=n117.1><hi>Pratim&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, iii. 17.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>vayam ayaças&amacr; c&imacr;re&ndotb;&amacr;ryo n&rdotb;po g&rdotb;ham&rdotb;tyun&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>pratataruditai&hdotb; k&rdotb;tsn&amacr;yodhy&amacr; m&rdotb;gai&hdotb; saha Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>dayitatanay&amacr;&hdotb; çoken&amacr;mb&amacr;&hdotb; snu&sdotb;&amacr;dhvapariçramair</hi>
    <l><hi>dhig iti vacas&amacr; cogre&ndotb;&amacr;tm&amacr; tvay&amacr; nanu yojit&amacr;&hdotb;?</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Hast thou not brought upon me disgrace and dishonour, on my noble <corr sic=father>father&apos;s</corr> death at the hands of his dearest, on all Ayodhy&amacr; ceaseless lamentation, exile on Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a, sorrow on the noble ladies, who love their children, for the cruel journey imposed on thy daughter-in-law, and on thyself the hateful reproach of a shameful deed?&rsquo; Equally effective is Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a&apos;s protest against R&amacr;ma&apos;s acquiescence in his exclusion from the throne:<note n=2 id=n117.2><hi>Ibid.</hi>, i. 18.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>yadi na sahase r&amacr;jño moha&mdotb; dhanu&hdotb; sp&rdotb;ça m&amacr; day&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>svajananibh&rdotb;ta&hdotb; sarvo &apos;py evam m&rdotb;du&hdotb; paribh&umacr;yate</hi>
    <l><hi>atha na rucitam muñca m&amacr;m aha&mdota; k&rdotb;taniçcayo</hi>
    <l><hi>yuvatirahita&mdota; kartu&mdota; loka&mdota; yataç chalit&amacr; vayam.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;If thou wilt not endure the king&apos;s infatuation, take thy bow, show no pity. Hidden among his own folk every weakling is thus overborne. But, if thou wilt not, leave me free at least; my mind is intent to make this world free of that youthful one, since cheated we have been.&rsquo; Bharata&apos;s devotion is expressed happily enough:<note n=3 id=n117.3><hi>Ibid.</hi>, iii. 24.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>tatra yasy&amacr;mi yatr&amacr;sau vartate Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;apriya&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>n&amacr;yodhy&amacr; ta&mdota; vin&amacr;yodhy&amacr; s&amacr;yodhy&amacr; yatra R&amacr;ghava&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Thither will I go where dwelleth Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a&apos;s beloved; without him Ayodhy&amacr; is not Ayodhy&amacr;; where R&amacr;ghava is, there is Ayodhy&amacr;.&rsquo; A martial spirit breathes in Vir&amacr;&tdotb;a&apos;s words:<note n=4 id=n117.4><hi>Pañcar&amacr;tra</hi>, ii. 28.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>t&amacr;&ddotb;itasya hi yodhasya çl&amacr;ghan&imacr;yena karma&ndotb;&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>ak&amacr;l&amacr;ntarit&amacr; p&umacr;j&amacr; n&amacr;çayaty eva vedan&amacr;m.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Instant fame destroys the pangs of the warrior stricken in performing a deed of valour.&rsquo; There is manly indignation and pathos in Dh&rdotb;tar&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;ra&apos;s mourning over Abhimanyu&apos;s death:<note n=5 id=n117.5><hi>D&umacr;tagha&tdotb;otkaca</hi>, 17.</note>

<pb n=118 id=pb118 facs="f:118"><lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>bah&umacr;n&amacr;&mdota; samupet&amacr;n&amacr;m ekasmin nirgh&rdotb;&ndotb;&amacr;tman&amacr;m</hi>
    <l><hi>b&amacr;le putre praharat&amacr;&mdota; katha&mdota; na patit&amacr; bhuj&amacr;&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;How could these cruel men bear to raise their arms to smite one young boy, alone against such a concourse?&rsquo; The necessity of toil to achieve any end is well brought out in a verse in the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>,<note n=1 id=n118.1>i. 18.</note> which has a curious parallel in <corr sic="Açvaghosa">Açvagho&sdotb;a</corr>:<note n=2 id=n118.2><hi>Pratim&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, p. xi.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>k&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;h&amacr;d agnir j&amacr;yate mathyam&amacr;n&amacr;d: bh&umacr;mis toya&mdota; khanyam&amacr;n&amacr; dad&amacr;ti</hi>
    <l><hi>sotsah&amacr;n&amacr;&mdota; n&amacr;sty as&amacr;dhya&mdota; nar&amacr;&ndotb;&amacr;m: m&amacr;rg&amacr;rabdh&amacr;&hdotb; sarvayatn&amacr;&hdotb; phalanti.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Fire ariseth from the rubbing of timber; the earth when dug giveth water; nothing is there that men may not obtain by effort; every exertion duly undertaken doth bear fruit.&rsquo; A profound truth, the rareness of gratitude, is emphasized in the <hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi>:<note n=3 id=n118.3>iv. 9.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>gu&ndotb;&amacr;n&amacr;&mdota; v&amacr; viç&amacr;l&amacr;n&amacr;&mdota; satk&amacr;r&amacr;&ndotb;&amacr;&mdota; ca nityaça&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>kart&amacr;ra&hdotb; sulabh&amacr; loke vijñ&amacr;t&amacr;ras tu durlabh&amacr;&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;There are many to show conspicuous virtue and to do constant deeds of kindness, but few are there who are grateful for such actions.&rsquo; The heavy burden of the duties of a king is effectively described in the <hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi>:<note n=4 id=n118.4>i. 12.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>dharma&hdotb; pr&amacr;g eva cintya&hdotb; sacivamatigati&hdotb; prek&sdotb;itavy&amacr; svabuddhy&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>pracch&amacr;dyau r&amacr;garo&sdotb;au m&rdotb;duparu&sdotb;agu&ndotb;au k&amacr;layogena k&amacr;ryau</hi>
    <l><hi>jñeya&mdota; lok&amacr;nuv&rdotb;ttam paracaranayanair ma&ndotb;&ddotb;alam prek&sdotb;itavyam</hi>
    <l><hi>rak&sdotb;yo yatn&amacr;d ih&amacr;tm&amacr; ra&ndotb;açirasi punas so &apos;pi n&amacr;vek&sdotb;itavya&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;First there must be consideration of the injunctions of the law, then the train of the minister&apos;s thought must be followed; desire and anger must be concealed; mercy and harshness must be applied as expediency demands; the temper of the people must be ascertained through the aid of spies as well as the demeanour of neighbouring kings; one&apos;s life must be guarded with every care, but in the forefront of battle heed for it must be laid aside.&rsquo; The position of a minister is no enviable one:<note n=5 id=n118.5><hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi>, i. 5.</note>

<pb n=119 id=pb119 facs="f:119"><lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>prasiddhau k&amacr;ry&amacr;&ndotb;&amacr;m pravadati jana&hdotb; p&amacr;rthivabalam</hi>
    <l><hi>vipattau vispa&sdotb;&tdotb;a&mdota; sacivam atido&sdotb;a&mdota; janayati</hi>
    <l><hi>am&amacr;ty&amacr; ity ukt&amacr;&hdotb; çrutisukham ud&amacr;ra&mdota; n&rdotb;patibhi&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>sus&umacr;k&sdotb;ma&mdota; da&ndotb;&ddotb;yante matibalavidagdh&amacr;&hdotb; kupuru&sdotb;&amacr;&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;If policy succeeds, the people acclaim the prince&apos;s might; if disaster ensue, it condemns the incompetency of the minister; poor fools, puffed up by their strength of intellect, they receive from kings the noble and sweet sounding style of &ldquo;counsellor&rdquo; only to be punished sharply for any failure.&rsquo;

<p>Bh&amacr;sa is fond of expressing typical feelings in simple language which later poets would deem lacking in ornament; thus he expresses a mother&apos;s feelings regarding her daughter&apos;s marriage in the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>:<note n=1 id=n119.1>ii. 7.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>adattety &amacr;gat&amacr; lajj&amacr; datteti vyathitam mana&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>dharmasneh&amacr;ntare nyast&amacr; du&hdotb;khit&amacr;&hdotb; khalu m&amacr;tara&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Shame were it if she be not betrothed; yet if betrothed sorrow is one&apos;s lot; between duty and love mothers are sore vexed in heart.&rsquo; The responsibility of a teacher is set out by Dro&ndotb;a in the <hi>Pañcar&amacr;tra</hi>:<note n=2 id=n119.2>i. 18.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>at&imacr;tya bandh&umacr;n avala&nmacr;ghya mitr&amacr;&ndotb;y: &amacr;c&amacr;ryam &amacr;gacchati çi&sdotb;yado&sdotb;a&hdotb;.</hi>
    <l><hi>b&amacr;la&mdota; hy apatya&mdota; gurave prad&amacr;tum: naiv&amacr;par&amacr;dho &apos;sti pitur na m&amacr;tu&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;A pupil&apos;s fault passes over relatives and friends and settles on the teacher, for it is no wrong in father or mother to hand over a young child to a preceptor.&rsquo;

<p>Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s power of depicting irony is specially prominent in the <hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi>,<note n=3 id=n119.3>iii. p. 25.</note> where V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; is driven to weave the garland for the new queen&apos;s marriage, on the score of her skill in this art. R&amacr;va&ndotb;a shows the heads which he represents as those of R&amacr;ma and Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a to S&imacr;t&amacr;, only to hear the announcement that his son is slain in the battle, by the very two whose death he has feigned.<note n=4 id=n119.4><hi>Abhi&sdotb;ekan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, v. p. 56.</note> Effective is the contrast between V&amacr;lin&apos;s splendour and his fall in his son A&nmacr;gada&apos;s lament:<note n=5 id=n119.5><hi>Ibid.</hi>, i. p. 10.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>atibalasukhaç&amacr;y&imacr; p&umacr;rvam &amacr;s&imacr;r har&imacr;ndra&hdotb;: k&sdotb;ititalaparivart&imacr; k&sdotb;&imacr;&ndotb;asarv&amacr;&nmacr;gace&sdotb;&tdotb;a&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Soft indeed thy couch aforetime as lord of the apes, who now <pb n=120 id=pb120 facs="f:120">dost lie on the ground, thy every movement stilled in death&rsquo;, and Duryodhana&apos;s fall is not less effectively described.<note n=1 id=n120.1><hi><corr sic="&Umacr;r&umacr;bha&nmacr;ga">&Umacr;rubha&nmacr;ga</corr></hi>, 29.</note>

<p>A characteristic of Bh&amacr;sa is his fondness for pithy proverbial phrases, &lsquo;Everything suits a handsome figure&rsquo;, &lsquo;Misfortunes never come singly&rsquo;, &lsquo;Good news sounds more pleasant from a friend&apos;s mouth<corr>&rsquo;</corr> (<hi lang=sa-Latn>pia&ndotb;ivediam&amacr;&ndotb;&amacr;&ndotb;i pi&amacr;&ndotb;i piadar&amacr;&ndotb;i honti</hi>), &lsquo;Man&apos;s fate is as mobile as an elephant&apos;s trunk&rsquo;, &lsquo;There are many obstacles in the road to fortune&rsquo;, &lsquo;A small cause begets grave misfortune&rsquo;, are found in the <hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi> alone. An idea once expressed fascinates Bh&amacr;sa and is repeated again and again in the same terms, a fact which incidentally helps to assure the genuineness of the plays. For some phrases he has a special fondness; <hi>m&amacr;</hi> with the instrumental is normal in lieu of the ordinary <hi>alam</hi>, which he also uses; <hi lang=sa-Latn>aho tu khalu</hi> to introduce a stanza; <hi lang=sa-Latn>ki&mdota; nu khalu</hi> in a question; <hi lang=sa-Latn>&amacr;ma</hi> and <hi lang=sa-Latn>b&amacr;dham</hi> to indicate assent; <hi lang=sa-Latn>sukham &amacr;ryasya</hi> as a phrase of greeting. Especially is he devoted to the term <hi lang=sa-Latn>vara</hi>, sometimes before, usually after, the noun whose quality it intensifies; the use occurs even twice or thrice in a single stanza.

<p>The harmony and melody of Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s style, added to its purity and perspicuity, have no better proof than the imitations of his verses which are unquestionably to be traced in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, who attests thus his practical appreciation of the merits of the dramatist, with whose established fame his nascent genius had to contend.


<div2 id=ch4.6 n=6>
<head><ab type=divNum>6.</ab> <hi>The Language of the Plays</hi></head>

<p>Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s Sanskrit<note n=2 id=n120.2>See <hi>Pratim&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, App. i; V. S. Sukhtankar, JAOS. xli. 118 ff.</note> is in the main correct according to the rules of the grammarians, but his dependence on the epic is revealed by the occasional use of epic irregularities, almost always for the sake of the metre, which in the epic also is the cause of many deviations from classical grammar. We have thus the irregular contractions <hi>putreti</hi> and <hi>Avanty&amacr;dhipate&hdotb;</hi>, and a number of middle forms in lieu of active, <hi>gami&sdotb;ye</hi>, <hi>garjase</hi>, <hi>drak&sdotb;yate</hi>, <hi>p&rdotb;cchase</hi>, <hi>bhraçyate</hi>, <hi>ruhyate</hi>, <hi>çro&sdotb;yate</hi>. In other cases the active replaces the middle, <hi>&amacr;p&rdotb;ccha</hi>, <hi>upalapsyati</hi>, <hi>pari&sdotb;vaja</hi>. There is confusion between the simple and the causative verb in <hi>sravati</hi> and <hi>v&imacr;janti</hi>, <pb n=121 id=pb121 facs="f:121">and in <hi>vimoktuk&amacr;ma</hi>. The forms <hi>rudant&imacr;</hi> and <hi>g&rdotb;hya</hi> have many epic parallels. Irregular compounds are <hi>sarvar&amacr;jña&hdotb;</hi> in verse, and <hi>K&amacr;çir&amacr;jñe</hi> in prose; <hi>vy&umacr;&ddotb;horas</hi> and <hi>tulyadharma</hi> occur in verse. The use in one clause of both <hi>ced</hi> and <hi>yadi</hi> is found in verse and also in prose, as in the epic. Mere blunders perhaps may be styled <hi>praty&amacr;yati</hi>, a haplological form of the causative with the meaning of the simple verb, <hi>sam&amacr;çv&amacr;situm</hi> with causative sense, and <hi>yudh</hi> as a masculine noun. There are other seeming irregularities, but they are either sanctioned by usage or possible of explanation by reference to variant interpretations of P&amacr;&ndotb;ini&apos;s rules.

<p>The Pr&amacr;krits<note n=1 id=n121.1>W. Printz, <hi>Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s Pr&amacr;krit</hi> (1921). The evidence of retention of older forms later in South Indian manuscripts (Barnett, JRAS. 1921, p. 589) is interesting but does not alter the importance of these forms.</note> found in Bh&amacr;sa are normally Çaurasen&imacr;, which is present in all the plays save the <hi>D&umacr;tav&amacr;kya</hi>, which has no Pr&amacr;krit; M&amacr;gadh&imacr; found in two different forms; and what may be styled Ardha-M&amacr;gadh&imacr;. The distinctive feature of his language is its transitional aspect as compared with Açvagho&sdotb;a on the one hand and K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa on the other. Açvagho&sdotb;a never softens&mdash;save in one instance&mdash;hard consonants, but both <hi>&tdotb;</hi> and <hi>t</hi> are changed to <hi>&ddotb;</hi> and <hi>d</hi> in Bh&amacr;sa. Açvagho&sdotb;a never omits consonants, but, though this is less often carried out than in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, we find cases of the loss of <hi>k</hi>, <hi>g</hi>, <hi>c</hi>, <hi>j</hi>, <hi>t</hi>, <hi>d</hi>, <hi>p</hi>, <hi>b</hi>, <hi>v</hi>, and <hi>y</hi> when intervocalic. <hi>y</hi> itself suffers frequent change to <hi>j</hi>, contrary to Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s usage. The change of <hi>n</hi> initial and medial to <hi>&ndotb;</hi> is regular, while it is unknown to Açvagho&sdotb;a. The aspirates <hi>kh</hi>, <hi>gh</hi>, <hi>th</hi>, <hi>dh</hi>, <hi>ph</hi>, and <hi>bh</hi> are all often reduced as later to <hi>h</hi>, but never in Açvagho&sdotb;a.

<p>In the case of conjunct consonants we find that <hi>jñ</hi> gives in Bh&amacr;sa either <hi>ññ</hi> or <hi>&ndotb;&ndotb;</hi>, possibly the latter by error; Açvagho&sdotb;a has <hi>ññ</hi> only, K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa <hi>&ndotb;&ndotb;</hi>. For <hi>ny</hi> and <hi>&ndotb;y</hi> Bh&amacr;sa has always <hi>&ndotb;&ndotb;</hi> as against Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s <hi>ññ</hi>. The eliding of a consonant, with the compensatory lengthening of the vowel as in <hi>d&imacr;sadi</hi>, is unknown to Açvagho&sdotb;a, where the omission of the consonant twice occurs but without lengthening; it is frequent in Bh&amacr;sa and regular in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa. The analogous use of a short vowel and a double consonant to represent a long vowel with a single consonant is unknown to Açvagho&sdotb;a, but Bh&amacr;sa has it in <hi>evva</hi>, <hi>evva&mdota;</hi>, <hi>jovvana</hi>, <pb n=122 id=pb122 facs="f:122"><hi>devva</hi>, <hi>ekka</hi>. On the other hand, like Açvagho&sdotb;a, for <hi>ry</hi> he has <hi>yy</hi> only in lieu of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s <hi>jj</hi>. For the later <hi>metta matta</hi> is always found, and the epenthetic vowel is <hi>u</hi>, not <hi>i</hi>, in <hi>purusa</hi>, and <hi>puruva</hi> is normal.

<p>In inflection we have, in the nominative and accusative plural of neuter stems in <hi>a</hi>, <hi>&amacr;ni</hi> in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <hi>&amacr;&ndotb;i</hi> in Bh&amacr;sa, while both <hi>&amacr;&ndotb;i</hi> and <hi>&amacr;i&mdota;</hi> are allowed later. The accusative plural masculine has also, analogously to <hi>&amacr;ni</hi> in the Ardha-M&amacr;gadh&imacr; of the Açoka inscriptions,<note n=1 id=n122.1><hi>&amacr;ni</hi> in P&amacr;li, <hi>&amacr;&ndotb;i</hi> in the Ardha-M&amacr;gadh&imacr; of the Jain Canon; Lüders, SBAW. 1913, pp. 999 ff.</note> <hi>&amacr;&ndotb;i</hi>, and the locative singular feminine is in <hi>&amacr;a&mdota;</hi>, not as later <hi>&amacr;e</hi>. For the later <hi>att&amacr;&ndotb;aa&mdota;</hi> we have <hi>att&amacr;&ndotb;a&mdota;</hi>. For &lsquo;we&rsquo; Açvagho&sdotb;a has <hi>vaya&mdota;</hi>, K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa <hi>amhe</hi>; Bh&amacr;sa both and <hi>vaa&mdota;</hi>. In the genitive plural Bh&amacr;sa has both <hi>amh&amacr;a&mdota;</hi> and the only form later <hi>amh&amacr;&ndotb;a&mdota;</hi>, while Açvagho&sdotb;a would doubtless have used <hi>amh&amacr;ka&mdota;</hi>. <hi>kissa</hi> is kept for later <hi>k&imacr;sa</hi>, and <hi>kocci</hi> (<hi>kaccid</hi>) disappears later. The root <hi>darç</hi> is represented by <hi>dass</hi> and <hi>da&ndota;s</hi>, <hi>grah</hi> by <hi>ga&ndotb;hadi</hi> against the later <hi>ge&ndotb;hadi</hi>, which, however, is found in Açvagho&sdotb;a. The older <corr sic=form>forms</corr> <hi>karia</hi> and <hi>gacchia</hi> or <hi>gamia</hi>, are found in lieu of <hi>kadua</hi> and <hi>gadua</hi>, but the last occurs once. <hi>m&amacr;</hi> is used with the gerund in the sense of <hi>alam</hi>.

<p>Many of these peculiarities mark also the M&amacr;gadh&imacr;, which appears in two slightly varied forms, the first in the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> and the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi>, the second in the <hi>B&amacr;lacarita</hi> and the <hi>Pañcar&amacr;tra</hi>; in the two latter we have <hi>&sdotb;</hi> and <hi>o</hi> for the <hi>ç</hi> and <hi>e</hi> of the former. As in Açvagho&sdotb;a there is no trace of obedience to the rules of the grammarians which require <hi>s&tdotb;</hi> for Sanskrit <hi>&sdotb;&tdotb;h</hi> or <hi>&sdotb;&tdotb;</hi>, <hi>çc</hi> for <hi>cch</hi>, <hi>sk</hi> or <hi>&hbarb;k</hi> for <hi>k&sdotb;</hi>. For &lsquo;I&rsquo; we find <hi>ahake</hi>, which is an intermediate stage between Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s <hi><corr sic=ahakam>ahaka&mdota;</corr></hi> and the later <hi>hage</hi>. <hi>ny</hi> becomes <hi>&ndotb;&ndotb;</hi>, not <hi>ññ</hi>, and the use of <hi>y</hi> to denote a dropped consonant is not carried out.

<p>The only passages that can claim to be anything like Ardha-M&amacr;gadh&imacr; are the remarks of Indra in disguise in the <hi>Kar&ndotb;abh&amacr;ra</hi>, where the characteristic signs, the use of <hi>r</hi>, <hi>s</hi>, and <hi>e</hi>, are found; in the speeches of Mu&sdotb;&tdotb;ika and C&amacr;&ndotb;&umacr;ra in the <hi>B&amacr;lacarita</hi> we have the use of <hi>l</hi> and a locative in <hi>ammi</hi>. A single passage in the <hi>Pañcar&amacr;tra</hi> suggests M&amacr;gadh&imacr; Apabhra&ndota;ça, but is probably corrupt.



<pb n=123 id=pb123 facs="f:123">
<div2 id=ch4.7 n=7>
<head><ab type=divNum>7.</ab> <hi>The Metres of the Dramas</hi></head>

<p>It is characteristic of Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s close dependence on the epic that his dramas should show a far more frequent use of the Çloka, 436 out of 1,092 verses. No later writer save Bhavabh&umacr;ti in his R&amacr;ma dramas approaches this frequency, which, it must be noted, is not confined to the epic plays, for the <hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi> has 26 Çlokas out of 57 verses. In some plays, it is true, such as the <hi>Madhyamavy&amacr;yoga</hi> or the <hi>Pañcar&amacr;tra</hi>, long series of Çlokas suggest incomplete command of the dramatic art on Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s part, but his general preference is clearly an outcome of his desire for rapid movement and simplicity; it is the later love for elaborate descriptions that encourages the use of sonorous and complex metres. The Çlokas are remarkably regular in construction; the diiambus in the second P&amacr;da is insisted on rigidly; the Vipul&amacr;s<note n=1 id=n123.1>Verses in which the last four syllables are not &#x23D1; - - &#x23D3;; viz. (1) &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D3;; (2) - &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D3;; (3) -, - - &#x23D3;; (4) - &#x23D1; - &#x23D3;.</note> are rare, the fourth is unknown, the second sporadic, the first twice as frequent as the third, and the prior foot is rarely<note n=2 id=n123.2>Cf. Jacobi, IS. xvii. 443 f.; V. S. Sukhtankar, JAOS. xli. 107 ff.</note> &#x23D3; - &#x23D1; -. The sparing use of the irregular forms is doubtless due to the comparatively small number of Çlokas used consecutively, which minimises the desire for change of form.

<p>Of the more elaborate metres, in which each syllable has a fixed length, the favourite is the Vasantatilaka, which occurs 179 times, while the Upaj&amacr;ti occurs 121 times. Next comes the Ç&amacr;rd&umacr;lavikr&imacr;&ddotb;ita (92), M&amacr;lin&imacr; (72), Pu&sdotb;pit&amacr;gr&amacr; with the scheme &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; - &#x23D1; - &#x23D1; - - | &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; - &#x23D1; &#x23D1; - &#x23D1; - &#x23D1; - - (66), Va&ndota;çasth&amacr; (35), Ç&amacr;lin&imacr; (2), Çikhari&ndotb;&imacr; (19), and Prahar&sdotb;i&ndotb;&imacr; (17). Other metres are purely sporadic; they include the Sragdhar&amacr;, Hari&ndotb;&imacr;, Vaiçvadev&imacr;,<note n=3 id=n123.3>- - - - -, - &#x23D1; - - &#x23D1; - -. Later only in the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> of classical dramas.</note> Drutavilambita,<note n=4 id=n123.4>&#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; - &#x23D1; &#x23D1; - &#x23D1; &#x23D1; - &#x23D1; -.</note> P&rdotb;thv&imacr;,<note n=5 id=n123.5>&#x23D1; - &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; - &#x23D1; -, &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; - &#x23D1; - - &#x23D1; -.</note> and Bhuja&nmacr;gapr&amacr;yata,<note n=6 id=n123.6>&#x23D1; - - &#x23D1; - - &#x23D1; - - &#x23D1; - -. Later first in the <hi>Caitanyacandrodaya</hi>.</note> while the Suvadan&amacr; occurs four times. There is one example of the Upag&imacr;ti with 12 morae in the first and third P&amacr;das, and 15 in the second and fourth, and one of the <corr sic="Vaital&imacr;ya">Vait&amacr;l&imacr;ya</corr> with 14 and 16 in the two sets respectively. There is also one example of the shortest form of Da&ndotb;&ddotb;aka metre, with six short syllables followed by <pb n=124 id=pb124 facs="f:124">seven amphimacers, while there is also one shorter metre with six amphimacers. The rarity of the &Amacr;ry&amacr; is remarkable; beside the one Upag&imacr;ti, which is in Pr&amacr;krit, there are only eleven, <corr sic="of of">of</corr> which five are in Pr&amacr;krit. Contrast the frequency of the &Amacr;ry&amacr; in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa where there are 31 out of 163 in the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>, and 35 out of 96 in the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi>.

<p>Generally the rules of classical prosody are faithfully observed; there is one hiatus between P&amacr;das and once Sandhi; in <hi>niyat&imacr;</hi> and <hi>maul&imacr;</hi>, as in <hi>an&umacr;kar&sdotb;a</hi>, the lengthening is probably metrical. The Çlokas <corr sic=shows>show</corr> a great fondness for epic tags, such as <hi>acire&ndotb;aiva k&amacr;lena</hi>, <hi>pras&amacr;da&mdota; kartum arhasi</hi>, and <hi>kampayann iva medin&imacr;m</hi>. Especially frequent is the breaking up of a verse between different speakers or by interruptions of one kind or another.


<div2 id=ch4.8 n=8>
<head><ab type=divNum>8.</ab> <hi>Bh&amacr;sa and K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa</hi></head>

<p>There is <hi>prima facie</hi> the probability that K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa should be strongly affected by a predecessor so illustrious and of such varied achievement, and the probability is turned into certainty by the numerous coincidences between the two writers.<note n=1 id=n124.1>T. Ga&ndotb;apati Ç&amacr;strin, <hi>Pratim&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, pp. 1 ff.</note> Inevitably, of course, with such a genius as K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s, the matter which is borrowed is transformed and normally improved in the change, and this fact renders strict proof of indebtedness impossible. But the evidence is sufficient to induce conviction to any one accustomed to weighing literary evidence of borrowing.

<p>In Act I of the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> the king is struck with the elegance of the simple bark dress worn by the heroine in keeping with her station as a maiden of the hermitage; <hi lang=sa-Latn>kim iva hi madhur&amacr;&ndotb;&amacr;m ma&ndotb;&ddotb;ana&mdota; n&amacr;k&rdotb;t&imacr;n&amacr;m</hi>, &lsquo;For what does not grace a lovely figure?&rsquo; he asks, and illustrates his theme.<note n=2 id=n124.2>i. 17.</note> The germ of this pretty idea is found in the <hi>Pratim&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, Act I, where S&imacr;t&amacr; playfully decks herself in a dress of bark, evoking the judgement of her friend: <hi>savvasoha&ndotb;&imacr;a&mdota; sur&umacr;va&mdota; &ndotb;&amacr;ma</hi>.<note n=3 id=n124.3>p. 7.</note> The converse relationship is here incredible; Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s imitation of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa would be feeble and tasteless, while K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s improvement on his original is apt and skilful. The fact of borrowing is established by the episode in the same act of the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> of <pb n=125 id=pb125 facs="f:125">the treatment of watering the garden as an act of penance on the maiden&apos;s part; an idea which occurs in a closely parallel passage in Act V of the <hi>Pratim&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>. Bh&amacr;sa treats it as bearable, illustrating it by the adduction of an example in the technical form of an Arth&amacr;ntarany&amacr;sa,<note n=1 id=n125.1>v. 3.</note> while K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa<note n=2 id=n125.2>i. 16.</note> is more severe in his condemnation, using the technical figure Nidarçan&amacr;, clearly a deliberate variation of the idea. In the same Act of the <hi>Pratim&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi><note n=3 id=n125.3>v. 11.</note> we find R&amacr;ma bidding S&imacr;t&amacr; take farewell of the fawns and the trees, which are her foster-children, and of her dear friends, the Vindhya mountain and the creepers; in the departure of Çakuntal&amacr; from the hermitage<note n=4 id=n125.4>iv. 8, 11, 13.</note> the trees and the fawns as well as the creepers share in the grief of her departure; of the deer is expressly used the term &lsquo;foster-child&rsquo; found in the <hi>Pratim&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>. Again in Act VII of that play S&imacr;t&amacr; is reminded of the distrust felt by the deer in Bharata,<note n=5 id=n125.5>p. 107.</note> just as Çakuntal&amacr; describes their distrust of Du&hdotb;&sdotb;anta.<note n=6 id=n125.6>v.</note> There is a parallel in the <hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi>, Act I, where V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; is received kindly by the lady of the hermitage, and thanks her for her courteous words, to the scene at the opening of the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, in which the king assures Anas&umacr;y&amacr; that her speech of welcome is sufficient hospitality (<hi>bhavat&imacr;n&amacr;&mdota; s&umacr;n&rdotb;tayaiva gir&amacr; k&rdotb;tam &amacr;tithyam</hi>). The parallel is completed by the instruction given by the chamberlain in Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s play to the servant to avoid disturbance to the hermitage with the commands of the king to the commander-in-chief. Similar also is the scene in Act II of the <hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi>, in which during the play of Padm&amacr;vat&imacr; and V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; in disguise reference is made to the former&apos;s approaching marriage, to the talk of Çakuntal&amacr;&apos;s friends with her in Act I. We have also in the sixth Act of either play a parallel treatment of the lute lost by Udayana in the one case,<note n=7 id=n125.7>vi. 1, 2.</note> and the ring lost by Çakuntal&amacr; in the other;<note n=8 id=n125.8>vi. 11, 13.</note> the verses in which these innocent objects of censure are attacked are similar in spirit and taste.

<p>Other traces of Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s influence are also to be found. The motif of the curse of Durv&amacr;sas which in the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> explains the sufferings of the heroine suggests the curse of Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;abh&amacr;rgava in the <hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi> which reduces the hero to a humble rank, and <pb n=126 id=pb126 facs="f:126">in the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> the lovers are reunited at the hermitage of the sage M&amacr;r&imacr;ca, as in the <hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi> they meet at the home of N&amacr;rada. There is a vague similarity also as regards many expressions in the two poets, but it would be unwise to lay any special stress on such testimony. But the more specific evidence given above of dependence is undeniable, and it is surprising to find it questioned by Professor Hillebrandt,<note n=1 id=n126.1><hi>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa</hi>, p. 103.</note> especially when we have K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s own recognition of Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s fame, and B&amacr;&ndotb;a&apos;s reiteration of it.

<p>The most valid argument which might be adduced against dependence is the fact that K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s dramas as they stand do not seem to agree with the rule observed in those of Bh&amacr;sa regarding the beginning of the drama. In Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s works the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra appears on the stage at the close of a N&amacr;nd&imacr;, the text of which is not given, and recites a verse which obviously is not technically a N&amacr;nd&imacr;, though it is of the same type, containing a benediction. In the works of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa the first verse is the N&amacr;nd&imacr;, and at the close of it the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra begins the play with a dialogue. But we cannot rely on the manuscripts as giving us the true practice of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s date, for we know that in the case of the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi> old manuscripts denied to the first verse the character of a N&amacr;nd&imacr;, and therefore presented the play in the form affected by Bh&amacr;sa, and the same style is sometimes followed in South Indian manuscripts of other plays. It is, therefore, impossible to hold that K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa rejected the practice of Bh&amacr;sa, or to base any argument on the facts.




<pb n=127 id=pb127 facs="f:127">
<div1 id=ch5 n=V>
<head type=label>V</head>

<head>THE PRECURSORS OF K&Amacr;LID&Amacr;SA AND Ç&Umacr;DRAKA</head>


<div2 id=ch5.1 n=1>
<head><ab type=divNum>1.</ab> <hi>The Precursors of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa</hi></head>

<p>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa refers in the prologue to the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi> not only to Bh&amacr;sa but to Saumilla and Kaviputra&mdash;perhaps rather the Kaviputras&mdash;as his predecessors in drama. Saumilla, whose name suggests an origin in Mah&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;ra, is mentioned by R&amacr;jaçekhara along with Bh&amacr;sa and a third poet R&amacr;mila. Further, the same authority tells us that R&amacr;mila and Somila composed a <hi>Ç&umacr;drakakath&amacr;</hi>, which is compared to Çiva under the form of Ardhan&amacr;r&imacr;çvara, in which he is united with his spouse, perhaps a hint at the union of heroic and love sentiments in the tale. A fine stanza is attributed to them in the <hi>Ç&amacr;r&nmacr;gadharapaddhati</hi>:<note n=1 id=n127.1>cxxxiii. 40.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>savy&amacr;dhe&hdotb; k&rdotb;çat&amacr; k&sdotb;atasya rudhira&mdota; da&sdotb;&tdotb;asya l&amacr;l&amacr;sruti&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>ki&mdota;cin naitad ih&amacr;sti tat katham asau p&amacr;nthas tapasv&imacr; m&rdotb;ta&hdotb;?</hi>
    <l><hi>&amacr; jñ&amacr;ta&mdota; madhulampa&tdotb;air madhukarair &amacr;rabdhakol&amacr;hale</hi>
    <l><hi>n&umacr;na&mdota; s&amacr;hasikena c&umacr;tamukule d&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;i&hdotb; sam&amacr;ropit&amacr;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Had he been ill he would have been emaciated; wounded, he would have bled; bitten, have shown the venom; no sign of these is here; how then has the unhappy traveller met his death? Ah! I see. When the bees began to hum as they sought greedily for honey, the rash one let his glance fall on the mango bud&rsquo;. Spring is the time for lovers&apos; meetings; the traveller, far from his beloved, lets himself think of her and dies of despair.

<p>The Kaviputras, a pair according to the verse cited from them in the <hi>Subh&amacr;&sdotb;it&amacr;vali</hi><note n=2 id=n127.2>v. 2227.</note>, were apparently also collaborators, a decidedly curious parallel with Somila and R&amacr;mila, as such collaboration seems later rare. The stanza is pretty:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>bhr&umacr;c&amacr;turya&mdota; kuñcit&amacr;nt&amacr;&hdotb; ka&tdotb;&amacr;k&sdotb;&amacr;&hdotb;: snigdh&amacr; h&amacr;v&amacr; lajjit&amacr;nt&amacr;ç ca h&amacr;s&amacr;&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>l&imacr;l&amacr;manda&mdota; prasthita&mdota; ca sthita&mdota; ca: str&imacr;&ndotb;&amacr;m etad bh&umacr;&sdotb;a&ndotb;am &amacr;yudha&mdota; ca.</hi>
</lg>

<pb n=128 id=pb128 facs="f:128"><p rend=noindent>&lsquo;The play of the brows, the sidelong glances which contract the corners of the eyes, words of love, bashful laughter, the slow departure in sport, and the staying of the steps: these are the ornaments and the weapons of women.&rsquo;

<p>Strange that so scanty remnants should remain of poets who must have deserved high praise to receive K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s recognition, but the fame of that poet doubtless inflicted on them the fate that all but overtook Bh&amacr;sa himself.


<div2 id=ch5.2 n=2>
<head><ab type=divNum>2.</ab> <hi>The Authorship and Age of the M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi></head>

<p>The discovery of the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi> of Bh&amacr;sa has cast an unexpected light on the age of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, but has still left it dubious whether or not the author is to be placed before K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa. That this rank was due to him was the general opinion before Professor Lévi attacked the theory, and it is curious that later he should have inclined to doubt the value of his earlier judgement. The existence of the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi> would explain, of course, the silence of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa on the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, if it existed in his time. Explicit use of the drama by K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa or the reverse would be conclusive, but unhappily none of the parallels which can be adduced have any effective force, and from rhetorical quotations we only have the fact that Ç&umacr;draka was recognized as an author by V&amacr;mana,<note n=1 id=n128.1>Lévi, TI. i. 198; V&amacr;mana, iii. 2. 4.</note> for Da&ndotb;&ddotb;in&apos;s citation of a verse found in the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> is now clearly known to be a citation from Bh&amacr;sa, in whose works the verse in question twice occurs. With this falls the hypothesis of Pischel,<note n=2 id=n128.2><hi>Rudra&tdotb;a</hi>, pp. 16 f. But see Hari Chand, <hi>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa</hi>, pp. 78 f.</note> who, after ascribing the play to Bh&amacr;sa, later fathered it upon Da&ndotb;&ddotb;in, to make good the number of three famous works with which he is in later tradition credited.

<p>The play itself presents Ç&umacr;draka, a king, as its author and gives curious details of his capacities; he was an expert in the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi>, the <hi>S&amacr;maveda</hi>, mathematics, the arts regarding courtesans, and the science of elephants, all facts which could be concluded from the knowledge shown in the play itself; he was cured of some complaint, and after establishing his son in his place, and performing the horse sacrifice, he entered the fire and <pb n=129 id=pb129 facs="f:129">died at the age of a hundred years and ten days. We have a good deal more information of a sort regarding his personality; he was to Kalha&ndotb;a in the <hi>R&amacr;jatara&nmacr;gi&ndotb;&imacr;</hi><note n=1 id=n129.1>iii. 343.</note> a figure to be set beside Vikram&amacr;ditya; the <hi>Skanda Pur&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi><note n=2 id=n129.2>Wilson, <hi>Works</hi>, ix. 194.</note> makes him out the first of the Andhrabh&rdotb;tyas; the <hi>Vet&amacr;lapañcavi&ndota;çati</hi> knows of his age as a hundred, and gives as his capital either Vardham&amacr;na or Çobh&amacr;vat&imacr;, which is the scene of his activities according to the <hi>Kath&amacr;sarits&amacr;gara</hi>, which tells of the sacrifice of a Brahmin who saves him from imminent death and secures his life of a hundred years by killing himself. In the <hi>K&amacr;dambar&imacr;</hi> he is located at Vidiç&amacr;, and in the <hi>Har&sdotb;acarita</hi> we hear of the device by which he got rid of his enemy Candraketu, prince of Cakora, while Da&ndotb;&ddotb;in in the <hi>Daçakum&amacr;racarita</hi> refers to his adventures in several lives. The fact that R&amacr;mila and Somila wrote a Kath&amacr; on him is significant of his legendary character in their time, considerably before K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa. A very late tradition in the <hi>V&imacr;racarita</hi> and the younger R&amacr;jaçekhara<note n=3 id=n129.3>IS. xiv. 147; JBRAS. viii. 240.</note> brings him into connexion with S&amacr;tav&amacr;hana or Ç&amacr;liv&amacr;hana, whose minister he was and from whom he obtained half his kingdom, including Prati&sdotb;&tdotb;h&amacr;na.<note n=4 id=n129.4>He is later the hero of a Parikath&amacr;, the <hi>Ç&umacr;drakavadha</hi> (R&amacr;yamuku&tdotb;a, ZDMG. xxviii. 117), and of a drama, <hi>Vikr&amacr;ntaç&umacr;draka</hi> (<hi>Sarasvat&imacr;ka&ndotb;&tdotb;h&amacr;bhara&ndotb;a</hi>, p. 378).</note>

<p>These references seem to suggest that Ç&umacr;draka was a merely legendary person, a fact rather supported than otherwise by his quaint name, which is absurd in a king of normal type. Nevertheless, Professor Konow treats him as historical, and finds in him the &Amacr;bh&imacr;ra prince Çivadatta, who, or whose son, &Imacr;çvarasena, is held by Dr. Fleet to have overthrown the last of the Andhra dynasty and to have founded the Cedi era of <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 248&ndash;9.<note n=5 id=n129.5>KF. pp. 107 ff. Cf. Bhandarkar, <hi>Anc. Hist. of India</hi>, pp. 64 f.; CHI. i. 311.</note> This remarkable result is held to be supported by the fact that in the play the king of Ujjayin&imacr; is P&amacr;laka, and is represented as being overthrown by &Amacr;ryaka, son of a herdsman (<hi>gop&amacr;la</hi>), and the &Amacr;bh&imacr;ras are essentially herdsmen. But this is much more than dubious; we have in fact legendary history in the names of P&amacr;laka, Gop&amacr;la&mdash;to be taken probably in the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> as a proper name&mdash;and &Amacr;ryaka. The proof is indeed overwhelming, for Bh&amacr;sa, who is the source of so much of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <pb n=130 id=pb130 facs="f:130">mentions in his <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> as sons of Pradyota of Ujjayin&imacr; both Gop&amacr;la and P&amacr;laka, and the <hi>B&rdotb;hatkath&amacr;</hi> must have contained the story of Gop&amacr;la surrendering the kingdom on Pradyota&apos;s death to P&amacr;laka, and of the latter having to make room for &Amacr;ryaka, his brother&apos;s son. To make history out of these events, which belong to the period shortly after the Buddha&apos;s death, say 483 <hi rend=asc>B.C.</hi>, and history of the third century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi>, is really impossible. Ç&umacr;draka is really clearly mythical, as is seen by the admission that he entered the fire, for no one can believe that he foresaw his death-day so precisely, or that the ceremony referred to is that performed on becoming an ascetic, or even that the prologue was added after his death; if it had been, it would have doubtless been of a different type. Still less can we imagine that he was helped in his work by R&amacr;mila and Somila.

<p>Windisch,<note n=1 id=n130.1><hi lang=de>Berichte der Sächs. Gesellsch. d. Wissenschaften</hi>, 1885, pp. 439 f.</note> on the other hand, attempted to prove a close similarity between the plot of the political side of the play and the legend of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, instancing the prediction of &Amacr;ryaka&apos;s attaining the throne, the jealousy of the king and his efforts to destroy him, and the final overthrow of the tyrant. The similarity, however, is really remote; the story is a commonplace in legend, and nothing can be made of the comparison.

<p>We are left, therefore, to accept the view that the author who wrote up the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi>, and combined with it a new play, thought it well to conceal his identity and to pass off the work under the appellation of a famous king. Lévi&apos;s suggestion that he chose Ç&umacr;draka for this purpose because he lived after Vikram&amacr;ditya, patron of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, and wished to give his work the appearance of antiquity by associating it with a prince who preceded Vikram&amacr;ditya, is clearly far-fetched, and insufficient to suggest a date. Nor can anything be deduced from the plentiful exhibition of Pr&amacr;krits, which is not, to judge from Bh&amacr;sa, a sign of very early date; while the use of M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr; Pr&amacr;krit would be, if proved, conclusive that he is fairly late. Konow&apos;s effort to support Ç&umacr;draka&apos;s connexion with Prati&sdotb;&tdotb;h&amacr;na by this use is clearly untenable.

<p>There is more plausibility in the argument from the simple form of the construction of the drama; the manner of Bh&amacr;sa is <pb n=131 id=pb131 facs="f:131">closely followed; thus in Act IX the absurd celerity with which the officer of the court obeys the order to bring the mother of Vasantasen&amacr; on the scene, and secures the presence of C&amacr;rudatta, is precisely on a par with Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s management of the plot in his dramas. The scenes of violence, in which Vasantasen&amacr; is apparently killed and C&amacr;rudatta is led to death, are reminiscent of Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s willingness to present such scenes, but they do not depart from the practice of the later drama as in Bhavabh&umacr;ti&apos;s <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>. The Çak&amacr;ra and Vi&tdotb;a are indeed figures of the early stage, but they are taken straight from Bh&amacr;sa and prove nothing. The position of the Buddhist monk is more interesting, but here again it is borrowed, though developed, and we find Buddhism respected in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa and Har&sdotb;a. The arguments based on the apparent similarity with the Greek New Comedy are without value for an early date, for they apply, if they have any value at all, to the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi> of Bh&amacr;sa. We are left, therefore, with no more than impressions, and these are quite insufficient to assign any date to the clever hand which recast the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi> and made one of the great plays of the Indian drama.<note n=1 id=n131.1>Jacobi (<hi>Bhavisattakaha</hi>, p. 83) believes in Ç&umacr;draka as a king, but thinks K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa older.</note>


<div2 id=ch5.3 n=3>
<head><ab type=divNum>3.</ab> <hi>The M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi></head>

<p>The first four acts of the play are a reproduction with slight changes of the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi> of Bh&amacr;sa;<note n=2 id=n131.2>See G. Morgenstierne, <hi lang=de>Über das Verhältnis zwischen C&amacr;rudatta und M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> (1921).</note> the very prologue shows the fact in the inexplicable transformation in the speech of the director, who opens in Sanskrit and then changes to Pr&amacr;krit, while in the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi> he speaks Pr&amacr;krit only as fits the part of the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka which he is to play. The names are slightly changed; the king&apos;s brother-in-law is called Sa&mdota;sth&amacr;naka, and the thief Çarvilaka. Act I carries the action up to the deposit of the gems by Vasantasen&amacr;; Act II relates the generosity of the hetaera to the shampooer who turns monk, and the attack made on him as he leaves her house by a mad elephant, from which Kar&ndotb;ap&umacr;raka, a servant of Vasantasen&amacr;&apos;s, saves him, receiving as reward a cloak which Vasantasen&amacr; recognizes as C&amacr;rudatta&apos;s. In Act III we learn of Çarvilaka&apos;s success in stealing the jewels, and the generous resolve of the wife of C&amacr;rudatta to give her necklace to <pb n=132 id=pb132 facs="f:132">replace them. In Act IV Çarvilaka gives the jewels to Vasantasen&amacr;, who, though aware of the theft, sets his love free. As he leaves with her, he hears of the imprisonment of his friend &Amacr;ryaka by order of the king, who knows the prophecy of his attaining the kingship, and leaving his newly-made bride, he hastens to aid his friend who is reported to have escaped from his captivity. The Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka then comes with the necklace, which the hetaera accepts in order to use it as a pretext to see C&amacr;rudatta once more. The visit occupies Act V, which passes in a storm forcing Vasantasen&amacr; to spend the night in C&amacr;rudatta&apos;s house. Act VI reveals her next morning offering to return to C&amacr;rudatta&apos;s wife the necklace, but her gift is refused. The child of C&amacr;rudatta appears, complaining that he has only a little earth cart (<hi>m&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>), whence the name of the play; Vasantasen&amacr; gives him her jewels that he may buy one of gold. She is to rejoin C&amacr;rudatta in a neighbouring park, the property of Sa&mdota;sth&amacr;naka, but by error she enters the car of Sa&mdota;sth&amacr;naka, while &Amacr;ryaka, who has been seeking a hiding-place, leaps into that of C&amacr;rudatta and is driven away; two policemen stop the cart, and one recognizes &Amacr;ryaka, but protects him from the other with whom he contrives a quarrel. In Act VII C&amacr;rudatta, who is conversing with the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, sees his cart drive up, discovers &Amacr;ryaka, and permits him to go off in it, while he himself leaves to find Vasantasen&amacr;. In the next act Sa&mdota;sth&amacr;naka, with the Vi&tdotb;a and a slave, meets in the park the shampooer turned monk, who has gone there to wash his robe in the tank; he insults him and beats him. The cart with Vasantasen&amacr; then is driven up, and the angry Sa&mdota;sth&amacr;naka first tries to win her by fair words; then, repulsed, orders the Vi&tdotb;a and the slave to slay her; they indignantly refuse; he pretends to grow calm, dismisses them, and then rains blows on Vasantasen&amacr;, who falls apparently dead; the Vi&tdotb;a, who sees his action, deserts at once his cause and passes over to &Amacr;ryaka&apos;s side. Sa&mdota;sth&amacr;naka, after burying the body under some leaves, departs, promising himself to put the slave in chains; the monk re-enters to dry his robe, finds and restores to life Vasantasen&amacr;, and takes her to the monastery to be cared for. In Act IX Sa&mdota;sth&amacr;naka denounces C&amacr;rudatta as the murderer of Vasantasen&amacr; to the court;<note n=1 id=n132.1>Jolly (<hi>Tagore Law Lectures</hi>, 1883, pp. 68 f.) compares the procedure of the Sm&rdotb;tis.</note> her <pb n=133 id=pb133 facs="f:133">mother is summoned as a witness, but defends C&amacr;rudatta, who himself is cited; the police officer testifies to the escape of &Amacr;ryaka, which implicates C&amacr;rudatta; the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka who enters the court, while <hi>en route</hi> to return to Vasantasen&amacr; the jewels she had given the child, is so indignant with the accuser that he lets fall the jewels; this fact, taken together with the evidence that Vasantasen&amacr; spent the night with C&amacr;rudatta and left next morning to meet him, and the signs of struggle in the park, deceives the judge, who condemns C&amacr;rudatta to exile; P&amacr;laka converts the sentence into one of death. Act X reveals the hero led to death by two Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;las, who regret the duty they have to perform; the servant of Sa&mdota;sth&amacr;naka escapes and reveals the truth, but Sa&mdota;sth&amacr;naka makes light of his words as a disgraced and spiteful slave, and the headsmen decide to proceed with their work. Vasantasen&amacr; and the monk enter just in time to prevent C&amacr;rudatta&apos;s death, and, while the lovers rejoice at their reunion, the news is brought that &Amacr;ryaka has succeeded P&amacr;laka whom he has slain, and that he has granted a principality to C&amacr;rudatta. The crowd shout for Sa&mdota;sth&amacr;naka&apos;s death, but C&amacr;rudatta pardons him, while the monk is rewarded by being appointed superior over the Buddhist monasteries of the realm, and, best of all, Vasantasen&amacr; is made free of her profession, and thus can become C&amacr;rudatta&apos;s lawful wife.

<p>To the author we may ascribe the originality of combining the political and the love intrigue, which give together a special value to the play. We know of no precise parallel to this combination of motifs, though in the <hi>B&rdotb;hatkath&amacr;</hi> there was probably a story recorded later<note n=1 id=n133.1>KSS. lviii. 2&ndash;54.</note> of the hetaera Kumudik&amacr; who fell in love with a poor Brahmin, imprisoned by the king; she allied herself to the fortunes of a dethroned prince Vikramasi&ndota;ha, aided him by her arts to secure the throne, and was permitted by the grateful prince to marry her beloved, now released from prison. The idea was doubtless current in some form or another, just as for the incidents of Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s story we can trace parallels in the Kath&amacr; literature of hetaerae who love honest and poor men and desire to abandon for their sakes their hereditary and obligatory calling, which the law will compel them to follow.<note n=2 id=n133.2><hi>Daçakum&amacr;racarita</hi>, ii.</note> The conception of the science of theft is neatly paralleled in the <hi>Daçakum&amacr;racarita</hi>, <pb n=134 id=pb134 facs="f:134">where a text-book of the subject is ascribed to Kar&ndotb;&imacr;suta, and the same work contains interesting accounts of gambling which illustrate Act II. The <hi>Kath&amacr;sarits&amacr;gara</hi><note n=1 id=n134.1>xii. 92; xviii. 121.</note> tells of a ruined gambler, who takes refuge in an empty shrine, and describes in Sarga xxxviii the palace of the hetaera Madanam&amacr;l&amacr; in terms which may be compared with the description by the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka in Act IV of the splendours of Vasantasen&amacr;&apos;s palace.<note n=2 id=n134.2>Cf. <hi>Çlokasa&mdota;graha</hi>, x. 60&ndash;163.</note> The court scene conforms duly to the requirements of the legal Sm&rdotb;tis of the sixth and seventh centuries <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi>, but the conservatism of the law renders this no sign of date.

<p>Though composite in origin and in no sense a transcript from life, the merits of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> are great and most amply justify what else would have been an inexcusable plagiarism. The hints given in the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi> here appear in full and harmonious development aided and heightened by the introduction of the intrigue, which combines the private affairs of the hero with the fate of the city and kingdom. C&amacr;rudatta&apos;s character is attractive in the extreme; considerate to his friend the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, honouring and respecting his wife, deeply devoted to his little son, Rohasena, he loves Vasantasen&amacr; with an affection free from all mere passion; he has realized her nobility of character, her generosity, and the depth and truth of her love. Yet his devotion is only a part of his life; aware of the vanity of all human things, he does not value life over-highly; his condemnation affects him most because it strikes at his honour that he should have murdered a woman, and he leaves thus to his child a heritage of shame. Not less attractive is Vasantasen&amacr;, bound, despite herself, to a profession which has brought her great wealth but which offends her heart; the judge and all the others believe her merely carried away by sensual passion; C&amacr;rudatta and his wife alone recognize her nobility of soul, and realize how much it means for her to be made eligible for marriage to her beloved. There is an admirable contrast with the hero in the Çak&amacr;ra Sa&mdota;sth&amacr;naka, who is described vividly and realistically. His position as brother-in-law of the king and his wealth make him believe that he is entitled to whatever he wants; Vasantasen&amacr;&apos;s repulse of him outrages his sense of his own importance <pb n=135 id=pb135 facs="f:135">more than anything else; brutal, ignorant<note n=1 id=n135.1>His errors in the field of mythology are appalling, e.g. Kunt&imacr; for S&imacr;t&amacr;, i. 21.</note> despite his association with courtiers of breeding and refinement, and cowardly, he has only skill in perfidy and deceit, and is mean enough to beg piteously for the life he has forfeited, but which C&amacr;rudatta magnanimously spares. The Vi&tdotb;a is an excellent foil to him in his culture, good taste, and high breeding; despite his dependence on his patron, he checks his violence to Vasantasen&amacr;, strives to prevent his effort to murder her, and when he fails in this takes his life into his own hands and passes over to &Amacr;ryaka&apos;s side. The Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka may be fond of food and comfortable living, but he remains faithful in adversity to his master, is prepared to die for him, and consents to live only to care for his son.

<p>The minor characters among the twenty-seven in all who appear have each an individuality rare in Indian drama. Çarvilaka, once a Brahmin, now a professional thief, performs his new functions with all the precision appropriate to the performance of religious rites according to the text-books. The shampooer, turned Buddhist monk, has far too much worldly knowledge to seek any temporal preferment from the favour of &Amacr;ryaka. M&amacr;thura, the master gambler, is a hardened sinner without bowels of compassion, but the two headsmen are sympathetic souls who perform reluctantly their painful duty. The wife of C&amacr;rudatta is a noble and gentle lady worthy of her husband, and one who in the best Indian fashion does not grudge him a new love if worthy, while the lively maid Madanik&amacr; deserves fully her freedom and marriage with Çarvilaka. Even characters which play so small an actual part as &Amacr;ryaka are effectively indicated. The good taste of the author is strikingly revealed by the alteration made in the last scene by a certain N&imacr;laka&ndotb;&tdotb;ha,<note n=2 id=n135.2>Stenzler&apos;s ed. pp. 325 ff.; Wilson, i. 177.</note> who holds that the omission to bring upon the stage C&amacr;rudatta&apos;s wife, his son, and the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka was due to the risk of making the time occupied by the representation of the play too great. He supplies the lacuna by representing all three as determined to commit suicide when C&amacr;rudatta rescues them; the author himself would never have consented to introduce the first wife at the moment when a second is about to be taken.

<p>The author is not merely admirable in characterization; he is <pb n=136 id=pb136 facs="f:136">master of pathos, as in the parting of C&amacr;rudatta from his son who asks the headsman to kill him and let his father go, and above all he abounds in humour and wit; even in the last act Goha, the headman, relieves the tension by the tale of his father who advised him on his death-bed not to slay too quickly the criminal on the off-chance that there might be a revolution or something to save the wretch&apos;s life, and, when after deliverance comes the noble C&amacr;rudatta forbids the slaying with steel of the grovelling Sa&mdota;sth&amacr;naka, Çarvilaka cheerfully remarks that is all right: he will be eaten alive by the dogs instead.

<p>These merits and the wealth of incident of the drama more than compensate for the overluxuriance of the double intrigue, and the lack of unity, which is unquestionable. A demerit in the eyes of the writers on poetics is the absence of elaborate descriptions, but the simple and clear diction of the play adds greatly to its liveliness and dramatic effect, and the poet has perfect command of the power of pithy and forcible expression. The Vi&tdotb;a effectually rebukes the arrogance and pride of family of Sa&mdota;sth&amacr;naka:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>ki&mdota; kulenopadi&sdotb;&tdotb;ena ç&imacr;lam ev&amacr;tra k&amacr;ra&ndotb;am</hi>
    <l><hi>bhavanti sutar&amacr;&mdota; sph&imacr;t&amacr;&hdotb; suk&sdotb;etre ka&ndotb;&tdotb;akidrum&amacr;&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Why talk of birth? Character alone counts. In rich soil the thorn trees grow fastest.&rsquo; C&amacr;rudatta on the point of death asserts his fearlessness:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>na bh&imacr;to mar&amacr;&ndotb;&amacr;d asmi kevala&mdota; d&umacr;&sdotb;ita&mdota; yaça&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>viçuddhasya hi me m&rdotb;tyu&hdotb; putrajanmasamo bhavet.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;I fear not death, but my honour is sullied; were that stain removed, death would be as dear as the birth of a son.&rsquo; Admirable is his expression of belief in Vasantasen&amacr; who may be dead:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>prabhavati yadi dharmo d&umacr;&sdotb;itasy&amacr;pi me &apos;dya: prabalapuru&sdotb;av&amacr;kyair bh&amacr;gyado&sdotb;&amacr;t katha&mdota;cit</hi>
    <l><hi>surapatibhavanasth&amacr; yatra tatra sthit&amacr; v&amacr;: vyapanayatu kala&nmacr;ka&mdota; svasvabh&amacr;vena saiva.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;If righteousness prevails, though to-day I am undone by the slanderous words of one in power through my unhappy fate, may she, dwelling with the gods above or wherever she be, by her true nature wipe out the blot upon me.&rsquo; Sadly he apostrophizes his child deemed to be at play:

<pb n=137 id=pb137 facs="f:137"><lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>h&amacr; Rohasena na hi paçyasi me vipattim: mithyaiva nandasi paravyasanena nityam.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Ah! Rohasena, since thou dost not know my plight, ever dost thou rejoice in thy play falsely, for sorrow is in store.&rsquo;

<p>The character of C&amacr;rudatta is effectively portrayed by the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka:<note n=1 id=n137.1>i. 48.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>d&imacr;n&amacr;n&amacr;&mdota; kalpav&rdotb;k&sdotb;a&hdotb; svagu&ndotb;aphalanata&hdotb; sajjan&amacr;n&amacr;&mdota; ku&tdotb;umb&imacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>&amacr;darça&hdotb; çik&sdotb;it&amacr;n&amacr;&mdota; sucaritanika&sdotb;a&hdotb; ç&imacr;lavel&amacr;samudra&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>satkart&amacr; n&amacr;vamant&amacr; puru&sdotb;agu&ndotb;anidhir dak&sdotb;i&ndotb;od&amacr;rasattvo hy</hi>
    <l><hi>eka&hdotb; çl&amacr;ghya&hdotb; sa j&imacr;vaty adhikagu&ndotb;atay&amacr; cocchvasanti c&amacr;nye.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;A tree of bounty to the poor, bent down by its fruits, his virtues; a support for all good men; a mirror of the learned, a touchstone of virtue, an ocean that never violates its boundaries of virtue; righteous, free from pride, a store-house of human merit, the essence of courtesy and nobility; he gives meaning to life by the goodness which we extol; other men merely breathe.&rsquo;

<p>The evils of poverty are forcibly depicted by C&amacr;rudatta himself:<note n=2 id=n137.2>v. 42.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>ç&umacr;nyair g&rdotb;hai&hdotb; khalu sam&amacr;&hdotb; puru&sdotb;&amacr;&hdotb; daridr&amacr;&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>k&umacr;paiç ca toyarahitais tarubhiç ca ç&imacr;r&ndotb;ai&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>yad <corr sic="d&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;ap&umacr;rvajanasa&mdota;gamavi&sdotb;m&rdotb;t&amacr;n&amacr;m">d&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;ap&umacr;rvajanasa&mdota;gamavism&rdotb;t&amacr;n&amacr;m</corr></hi>
    <l><hi>evam bhavanti viphal&amacr;&hdotb; parito&sdotb;ak&amacr;l&amacr;&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Like empty houses, in truth, are poor men, or wells without water or blasted trees; for fruitless are their hours of relaxation, since their former friends forget them.&rsquo; The same idea is again expressed by the hero:<note n=3 id=n137.3>i. 13; cf. <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi>, i. 5.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>satya&mdota; na me vibhavan&amacr;çak&rdotb;t&amacr;sti cint&amacr;: bh&amacr;gyakrame&ndotb;a hi dhan&amacr;ni bhavanti y&amacr;nti</hi>
    <l><hi>etat tu m&amacr;&mdota; dahati na&sdotb;&tdotb;adhan&amacr;çrayasya: yat sauh&rdotb;d&amacr;d api jan&amacr;&hdotb; çithil&imacr;bhavanti.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;My dejection, assuredly, is not born of the mere loss of my wealth, for with the turn of fortune&apos;s wheel riches come and go. Nay, what pains me is that men fail in friendship to him whose sometime wealth has taken flight.&rsquo; The repetition of the idea becomes, indeed, wearisome, but the ingenuity and fancy of the author are undoubted.

<pb n=138 id=pb138 facs="f:138"><p>Love is also effectively described. The Vi&tdotb;a is an admirer of Vasantasen&amacr; and thus addresses the fleeting lady:<note n=1 id=n138.1>i. 22; cf. <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi> i. 11, on which it improves.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>ki&mdota; tva&mdota; padair mama pad&amacr;ni viçe&sdotb;ayant&imacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>vy&amacr;l&imacr;va y&amacr;si patagendrabhay&amacr;bhibh&umacr;t&amacr;?</hi>
    <l><hi>veg&amacr;d aham praviç&rdotb;ta&hdotb; pavana&mdota; nirundhy&amacr;m</hi>
    <l><hi>tvannigrahe tu varag&amacr;tri na me prayatna&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Why, surpassing my speed with thine own, dost thou flee like a snake, filled with fear of the lord of birds? Were I to use my speed I could outstrip the wind itself, but I would make no effort to seize thee, O fair-limbed one.&rsquo; C&amacr;rudatta praises the rain:<note n=2 id=n138.2>v. 49.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>dhany&amacr;ni te&sdotb;&amacr;&mdota; khalu j&imacr;vit&amacr;ni: ye k&amacr;min&imacr;n&amacr;&mdota; g&rdotb;ham &amacr;gat&amacr;n&amacr;m</hi>
    <l><hi>&amacr;rdr&amacr;&ndotb;i meghodakaç&imacr;tal&amacr;ni: g&amacr;tr&amacr;&ndotb;i g&amacr;tre&sdotb;u pari&sdotb;vajanti.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Happy the life of those whose limbs embrace the limbs of their loved ones, come to their home, dripping wet and cold with the water of the clouds.&rsquo;

<p>Moreover, while to later Indian critics the descriptive stanzas of the poet are lacking in that elaboration and cleverness which are admitted by developed taste, to us much of the poetic value of the drama depends on the power of the poet to describe with point and feeling in simple terms which require no effort to appreciate. The whole scene of the storm gains by the stanzas in which its beauties are described, once we consent, as we must do in appreciating any Sanskrit play, to ignore the inappropriateness of these lyric effusions in the actual circumstances. In real life a lady seeking eagerly an interview with her beloved, in resplendent attire, would have no time to display her command of Sanskrit poetry in description, when counsels of prudence urged her to her destination with the least possible delay:<note n=3 id=n138.3>v. 15.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>m&umacr;&ddotb;he nirantarapayodharay&amacr; mayaiva: k&amacr;nta&hdotb; sah&amacr;bhiramate ki&mdota; tav&amacr;tra?</hi>
    <l><hi>m&amacr;&mdota; garjitair iti muhur viniv&amacr;rayant&imacr;: m&amacr;rga&mdota; ru&ndotb;addhi kupiteva niç&amacr; sapatn&imacr;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;&ldquo;If, foolish one, my beloved has joy clasped in my bosom&apos;s embrace, what is that to thee?&rdquo; Thus night with her thunders, seeking to stay me, blocks my path, like an angry rival.&rsquo;

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>megh&amacr; var&sdotb;antu garjantu muñcantv açanim eva v&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>ga&ndotb;ayanti na ç&imacr;to&sdotb;&ndotb;a&mdota; rama&ndotb;&amacr;bhimukh&amacr;&hdotb; striya&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<pb n=139 id=pb139 facs="f:139"><p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Let the clouds rain, thunder, or cast down the levin bolt; women who speed to their loved ones reckon nothing of heat or cold.&rsquo;<note n=1 id=n139.1>v. 16.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>gat&amacr; n&amacr;ça&mdota; t&amacr;r&amacr; upak&rdotb;tam as&amacr;dh&amacr;v iva jane</hi>
    <l><hi>viyukt&amacr;&hdotb; k&amacr;ntena striya iva na r&amacr;janti kakubha&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>prak&amacr;m&amacr;ntastapta&mdota; tridaçapatiçastrasya çikhin&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>drav&imacr;bh&umacr;tam manye patati jalar&umacr;pe&ndotb;a gaganam.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;The stars disappear, like a favour bestowed on a worthless man; the quarters lose their radiance, like women severed from their beloved; molten by the fierce fire of Indra&apos;s bolt, the sky, I ween, is poured down upon us in rain.&rsquo;<note n=2 id=n139.2>v. 25.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>unnamati namati var&sdotb;ati garjati megha&hdotb; karoti timiraugham</hi>
    <l><hi>prathamaçr&imacr;r iva puru&sdotb;a&hdotb; karoti r&umacr;p&amacr;&ndotb;y anek&amacr;ni.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;The cloud rises aloft, bows down, pours rain, sends thunder and the dark; every show it makes of its wealth like the man newly rich.&rsquo;<note n=3 id=n139.3>v. 26.</note>

<p>Last we may cite the rebuke of Vasantasen&amacr; to the lightning:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>yadi garjati v&amacr;ridharo garjatu tann&amacr;ma ni&sdotb;&tdotb;hur&amacr;&hdotb; puru&sdotb;&amacr;&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>ayi vidyut pramad&amacr;n&amacr;&mdotb; tvam api ca du&hdotb;kha&mdota; na j&amacr;n&amacr;si?</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;If the cloud must thunder, then let him thunder; cruel were men ever; but, O lightning, can it be that thou too dost not know the pangs of a maiden&apos;s love?&rsquo;<note n=4 id=n139.4>v. 32.</note>

<p>The merits of the play are sufficient to enable its author to dispense with praise not deserved. For Ç&umacr;draka, regarded as the author, has been credited<note n=5 id=n139.5>Ryder, <hi>The Little Clay Cart</hi>, p. xvi.</note> with the distinction of being a cosmopolitan; however great the difference between K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, &lsquo;the grace of poetry&rsquo;<note n=6 id=n139.6>Jayadeva, <hi>Prasannar&amacr;ghava</hi>, i. 22.</note> and Bhavabh&umacr;ti, &lsquo;the master of eloquence,&rsquo;<note n=7 id=n139.7><hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi>, i. 4.</note> these two authors, it is said, are far more allied in spirit than is either of them with the author of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>; the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> and the <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi> could have been produced nowhere save in India, Çakuntal&amacr; is a Hindu maid, M&amacr;dhava a Hindu hero, while Sa&mdota;sth&amacr;naka, Maitreya, and Madanik&amacr; are citizens of the world. This claim, however, can hardly be admitted; the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> as a whole is a drama redolent of Indian thought and life, and none of the three characters adduced have any special claim to be more cosmopolitan than some of the <pb n=140 id=pb140 facs="f:140">creations of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa. The variety of the characters of the play is unquestionably laudable, but the praise in part is due to Bh&amacr;sa, and not to his successor. To the same source also must be attributed the comparative simplicity of the style, which certainly contrasts with the degree of elaboration found even in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, and carried much further in Bhavabh&umacr;ti. The variety of incident is foreshadowed in Bh&amacr;sa, but the development of the drama must be attributed to the author, and frankly it cannot be said to be wholly artistic; that the drama is unnecessarily complex must be conceded, nor can the action be said to proceed with complete ease and conviction. The humour of the play is undoubted, but here again to Bh&amacr;sa must honour be given. Bh&amacr;sa again is the prototype for the neglect of the rule of the dramaturgy which demands the presence of the hero on the stage in each act; the naming of the play, in defiance of convention, from a minor incident may justly be ascribed to the author himself.

<p>The real Indian character of the drama reveals itself in the demand for the conventional happy ending, which shows us every person in a condition of happiness, with the solitary exception of the evil king. C&amacr;rudatta is restored to affluence and power from the depths of infamy and misery; Vasantasen&amacr;&apos;s virtue and fidelity are rewarded by the signal honour of restoration to the rank of one whom the hero may marry; the monk, who refuses worldly gain, has the pleasure of becoming charged with spiritual oversight, with its attendant amenities&mdash;not inconsiderable to judge from our knowledge of the wealth of Buddhist monasteries. Even Sa&mdota;sth&amacr;naka is spared, to save us, we may assume, the pain of seeing anything so unpleasant as a real, even if well deserved, death on the stage, for the king perishes at a distance from the scene. If, as C&amacr;rudatta asserts at the end of the play, fate plays with men like buckets at the well, one rising as another falls, Ç&umacr;draka is not inclined to seek realism sufficiently to permit of his introducing even a tinge of sorrow into the close of his drama.


<div2 id=ch5.4 n=4>
<head><ab type=divNum>4.</ab> <hi>The Pr&amacr;krits</hi></head>

<p>No extant play exhibits anything like the variety of Pr&amacr;krits found in the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, which seems almost as if intended to <pb n=141 id=pb141 facs="f:141">illustrate the precepts of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> in this regard.<note n=1 id=n141.1>Cf. Pischel, <hi lang=de>Pr&amacr;krit-Grammatik</hi>, pp. 25 ff.</note> The commentator obligingly provides us with the names of the dialects represented and those who speak them. Çaurasen&imacr; is spoken by the director after his Sanskrit exordium, the comedienne, Vasantasen&amacr;, Madanik&amacr;, her servant, Kar&ndotb;ap&umacr;raka, her slave, her mother, the wife of C&amacr;rudatta, the Çre&sdotb;&tdotb;hin or guildsman, and the officer of the court, and Radanik&amacr;, C&amacr;rudatta&apos;s servant. Avantik&amacr; is attributed to the two policemen V&imacr;raka and Candanaka. The Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka speaks Pr&amacr;cy&amacr;. The shampooer who turns monk, Sth&amacr;varaka, servant of the Çak&amacr;ra Sa&mdota;sth&amacr;naka, Kumbh&imacr;laka, servant of Vasantasen&amacr;, Vardham&amacr;naka, servant of C&amacr;rudatta, and the little Rohasena speak M&amacr;gadh&imacr;. The Çak&amacr;ra speaks Ç&amacr;k&amacr;r&imacr;, the Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;las who act as headsmen C&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;l&imacr;, and the chief gambler &Ddotb;hakk&imacr;. Sanskrit, on the other hand, is spoken by the hero, the Vi&tdotb;a, the royal claimant &Amacr;ryaka, and the Brahmin thief Çarvilaka. This distribution of Pr&amacr;krits agrees with that of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> as we have it in one important aspect; it ignores the M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr;, though for some not obvious reason Konow claims that this was introduced into the drama by Ç&umacr;draka. On the other hand, it does not assign to slaves, R&amacr;jputs, or guildsmen the Ardha-M&amacr;gadh&imacr; of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>. In the case of Rohasena the M&amacr;gadh&imacr; ascribed to him has been largely converted into Çaurasen&imacr; in the manuscripts. The Ç&amacr;stra ascribes &Amacr;vant&imacr; to Dh&umacr;rtas, which is interpreted as meaning gamblers; the distinction between it and Çaurasen&imacr; is minimal; it is said to have <hi>s</hi> and <hi>r</hi> and be rich in proverbs by P&rdotb;thv&imacr;dhara, and this accords adequately with the actual speeches of the officers. But the second, Candanaka, expressly gives himself out as a southerner, and we can hardly avoid the conclusion that the dialect is D&amacr;k&sdotb;i&ndotb;&amacr;ty&amacr; which the Ç&amacr;stra ascribes to warriors, police officers, and gamblers. The Pr&amacr;cy&amacr; of the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka is nothing more or less than Çaurasen&imacr;, though it is given separately in the Ç&amacr;stra also; it may have been an eastern dialect of the main language. The &Ddotb;hakk&imacr; ascribed to the gamblers should probably<note n=2 id=n141.2>JRAS. 1913, p. 882; 1918, p. 513. Cf. <hi>K&amacr;vyam&imacr;m&amacr;&ndota;s&amacr;</hi>, p. 51.</note> be named &Tdotb;akk&imacr;, or &Tdotb;&amacr;kk&imacr;, an easy error because of the confusion of the letters in manuscripts. Pischel regarded it as an eastern dialect which had <hi>l</hi>, and preserved two <pb n=142 id=pb142 facs="f:142">sibilants <hi>ç</hi> and <hi>s</hi> in which <hi>&sdotb;</hi> was merged; Sir G. Grierson finds in it a western dialect, which seems more probable. The Ç&amacr;k&amacr;r&imacr; of Sa&mdota;sth&amacr;naka is nothing more or less than M&amacr;gadh&imacr;, which is given as the language of that person by the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, and the C&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;l&imacr; is merely another variety of that Pr&amacr;krit. Thus the rich variety reduces itself in effect to Çaurasen&imacr;<note n=1 id=n142.1>Used in verse even, e.g. by the <corr sic="Vid&umacr;saka">Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka</corr>.</note> and M&amacr;gadh&imacr; with <corr sic="Takk&imacr;">&Tdotb;akk&imacr;</corr>, of which we have too little to say precisely what it was.


<div2 id=ch5.5 n=5>
<head><ab type=divNum>5.</ab> <hi>The Metres</hi></head>

<p>The author of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> shows considerable skill in metrical handling; his favourite metre is naturally enough the Çloka, which suits his rapid style and is adapted to further the progress of the dialogue. It occurs 83 times, while the next favourite, the pretty Vasantatilaka, appears 39 times, and the Ç&amacr;rd&umacr;lavikr&imacr;&ddotb;ita 32 times. The only other important metres are the Indravajr&amacr; (26), with the Va&ndota;çasth&amacr; (9), and the Upaj&amacr;ti combination of both (5). But there occur also the Pu&sdotb;pit&amacr;gr&amacr;, Prahar&sdotb;i&ndotb;&imacr;, M&amacr;lin&imacr;, Vidyunm&amacr;l&amacr;,<note n=2 id=n142.2>&mdash; &mdash; &mdash; &mdash;, &mdash; &mdash; &mdash; &mdash;. In no other classical drama is it found.</note> Vaiçvadev&imacr;, Çikhari&ndotb;&imacr;, Sragdhar&amacr;, and Hari&ndotb;&imacr;, and one irregular stanza. Of the &Amacr;ry&amacr; there are 21 cases, including one G&imacr;ti, with 30 morae in each half stanza, and there are two instances of the Aupacchandasika. The Pr&amacr;krit metres show considerable variety; of the &Amacr;ry&amacr; type there are 53 as against 44 of other types.<note n=3 id=n142.3>The apparent occurrence of M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr; stanzas is in all probability not in accordance with the original text, which knew only the Pr&amacr;krits given in § 4; see Hillebrandt, GN. 1905, pp. 436 ff.</note>






<pb n=143 id=pb143 facs="f:143">
<div1 id=ch6 n=VI>
<head type=label>VI</head>

<head>K&Amacr;LID&Amacr;SA</head>


<div2 id=ch6.1 n=1>
<head><ab type=divNum>1.</ab> <hi>The Date of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa</hi></head>

<p>It is unfortunate, though as in the case of Shakespeare not surprising, that we know practically nothing of the life and age of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa save what we can infer from his works and from the general history of Sanskrit literature. There are indeed stories<note n=1 id=n143.1>Hillebrandt, <hi>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa</hi> (1921), pp. 7 ff.</note> of his ignorance in youth, until he was given poetic power by the grace of K&amacr;l&imacr;, whence his strange style of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, slave of K&amacr;l&imacr;, which is not one <hi>prima facie</hi> to be expected in the case of a poet who shows throughout his work the finest flower of Brahmanical culture. But these tales are late and worthless, and equally without value is the fiction that he was a contemporary of King Bhoja of Dh&amacr;r&amacr; in the first half of the eleventh century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> As little value, however, attaches to a tale which has been deemed of greater value, the alleged death of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa in Ceylon when on a visit there by the hand of a courtesan, and the discovery of his murder by his friend Kum&amacr;rad&amacr;sa, identified with the king of that name of the early part of the sixth century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> The tradition, as I showed in 1901, is very late, unsupported by the earliest evidence, and totally without value.<note n=2 id=n143.2>JRAS. 1901, pp. 578 ff.</note>

<p>The most prevalent tradition makes K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa a contemporary of Vikram&amacr;ditya, and treats him as one of the nine jewels of that monarch&apos;s entourage. Doubtless the king meant by the tradition, which is late and of uncertain provenance, is the Vikram&amacr;ditya whose name is associated with the era of 57 <hi rend=asc>B.C.</hi> and who is credited with a victory over the Çakas. Whatever truth there may be in the legend, and in this regard we have nothing but conjecture,<note n=3 id=n143.3><hi>e.g.</hi> Konow, SBAW. 1916, pp. 812 ff.</note> there is not the slightest reason to accept so early a date for K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, and it has now no serious supporter outside India. But, based on Fergusson&apos;s suggestion<note n=4 id=n143.4>JRAS. xii. (1880), 268 f.</note> that the era of <pb n=144 id=pb144 facs="f:144">57 <hi rend=asc>B.C.</hi> was based on a real victory over H&umacr;&ndotb;as in <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 544, the reckoning being antedated 600 years, Max Müller<note n=1 id=n144.1><hi>India</hi> (1883), pp. 281 ff.</note> adopted the view that K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa flourished about that period, a suggestion which was supported by the fact that Var&amacr;hamihira, also a jewel, certainly belongs to that century, and others of the jewels might without great difficulty be assigned to the same period. The theory in so far as it rested on Fergusson&apos;s hypothesis has been definitely demolished by conclusive proof of the existence of the era, as that of the M&amacr;lavas, before <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 544, but the date has been supported on other grounds. Thus Dr. Hoernle<note n=2 id=n144.2>JRAS. 1909, pp. 89 ff.</note> found it most probable that the victor who was meant by Vikram&amacr;ditya in tradition was the king Yaçodharman, conqueror of the H&umacr;&ndotb;as, and the same view was at one time supported by Professor Pathak,<note n=3 id=n144.3>JBRAS. xix. 39 ff.</note> who laid stress on the fact that K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa in his account of the Digvijaya, or tour of conquest of the earth, of the ancient prince Raghu in the <hi>Raghuva&ndota;ça</hi><note n=4 id=n144.4>iv. 68.</note> refers to the H&umacr;&ndotb;as, and apparently locates them in Kashmir, because he mentions the saffron which grows only in Kashmir.

<p>An earlier date, to bring K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa under the Guptas, has been favoured by other authorities, who have found that the reference to a conquest of the H&umacr;&ndotb;as must be held to be allusion to a contemporary event. This date is attained on second thoughts by Professor Pathak,<note n=5 id=n144.5><hi>Meghad&umacr;ta</hi> (ed. 2), pp. vii ff. In v. 67 he reads <hi>Va&nmacr;k&sdotb;&umacr;</hi> = Oxus, for <hi>Sindhu</hi>; see Haranchandra Chakladar, <hi>V&amacr;tsy&amacr;yana</hi>, p. 23.</note> who places the H&umacr;&ndotb;as on the Oxus on this view, and holds that K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa wrote his poem shortly after <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 450, the date of the first establishment of their empire in the Oxus valley, but before their first defeat by Skandagupta, which took place before <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 455, when they were still in the Oxus valley and were considered the most invincible warriors of the age. On the other hand, Monmohan Chakravarti,<note n=6 id=n144.6>JRAS. 1903, pp. 183 f.; 1904, pp. 158 f.</note> who converted Professor Pathak to belief in the contemporaneity of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa with the Guptas, places the date at between <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 480 and 490, on the theory that the H&umacr;&ndotb;as were in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s time in Kashmir. The whole argument, however, appears fallacious; Raghu is represented as conquering the Persians, and there is no <pb n=145 id=pb145 facs="f:145">contemporary ground for this allegation; manifestly we have no serious historical reminiscences, but, as is natural in a Brahmanical poet, a reference of the type of the epic which knows perfectly well the H&umacr;&ndotb;as. The exact identity of the H&umacr;&ndotb;as of the epic is immaterial; as the name had penetrated to the western world by the second century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> if not earlier, there is no conceivable reason for assuming that it could not have reached India long before the fifth or sixth centuries <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi><note n=1 id=n145.1>Huth, <hi lang=de>Die Zeit des Kâlidâsa</hi>, pp. 29 ff.</note>

<p>Other evidence is scanty. Mallin&amacr;tha, as is notorious, finds in verse 14 of the <hi>Meghad&umacr;ta</hi> a reference to a poet Nicula, a friend of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, and an enemy Dign&amacr;ga; the latter would be the famous Buddhist logician, and, assuming that his date is the fifth century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi>, we have an argument for placing K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa in the fifth or sixth century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> But the difficulties of this argument are insurmountable. In the first place, it is extremely difficult to accept the alleged reference to Nicula, who is otherwise a mere name, and to Dign&amacr;ga; why a Buddhist logician should have attacked a poet does not appear, especially as every other record of the conflict is lost. Nor is the <hi>double entendre</hi> at all in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s manner;<note n=2 id=n145.2>Thomas&apos;s suggestion (Hillebrandt, p. 12) of a reference to the S&amacr;rasvata school in the same passage only adds to the improbability of the reference.</note> such efforts are little in harmony with K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s age, while later they are precisely what is admitted, and are naturally seen by the commentators where not really intended. It is significant that the allusion is not noted by Vallabhadeva, and that it first occurs in Dak&sdotb;in&amacr;varta N&amacr;tha (<hi>c.</hi> <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1200) and Mallin&amacr;tha (fourteenth century), many centuries after the latest date assignable to K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa. Even, however, if the reference were real, the date of Dign&amacr;ga can no longer be placed confidently in the fifth century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi>, or with other authorities in the sixth century. On the contrary, there is a good deal of evidence which suggests that <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 400 is as late as he can properly be placed.<note n=3 id=n145.3>Keith, <hi>Indian Logic</hi>, p. 28.</note>

<p>As little can any conclusion be derived from the allusion in V&amacr;mana to a son of Candragupta in connexion with Vasubandhu, which has led to varied efforts at identification, based largely on the fifth century as the date of Vasubandhu. But it is far more <pb n=146 id=pb146 facs="f:146">probable that Vasubandhu dates from the early part of the fourth century, and nothing can be derived hence to aid in determining the period of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa.<note n=1 id=n146.1>Pathak, IA. xl. 170 f.; Hoernle, 264; Harapras&amacr;d, JPASB. i. (1905), 253; JBORS. ii. 35 f.; 391 f.</note>

<p>More solid evidence must be sought in the astronomical or astrological data which are found in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa. Professor Jacobi has seen in the equalization of the midday with the sixth K&amacr;la in the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi> a proof of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s having lived in the period immediately subsequent to the introduction from the west of the system of reckoning for ordinary purposes the day by 12 Hor&amacr;s, K&amacr;la being evidently used as Hor&amacr;. The passage has been interpreted by Huth as referring to a sixteenfold division, and the argument to be derived from it is not established, but Huth, on the other hand, manifestly errs by making K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa posterior to &Amacr;ryabha&tdotb;a (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 499) on the score that in the <hi>Raghuva&ndota;ça</hi> he refers to eclipses as caused by the shadow of the earth, the reference being plainly to the old doctrine of the spots on the moon. It is, however, probable that K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa in the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi> refers to the figure of the lion in the zodiac, borrowed from the west, and it is certain that he was familiar with the system of judicial astrology, which India owes to the west, for he alludes both in the <hi>Raghuva&ndota;ça</hi> and the <hi>Kum&amacr;rasambhava</hi> to the influence of the planets, and above all uses technical terms like <hi>ucca</hi> and even <hi>j&amacr;mitra</hi>, borrowed from Greece. A date not probably prior to <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 350 is indicated by such passages.<note n=2 id=n146.2>Jacobi, ZDMG. xxx. 303 ff.; <hi lang=de>Monatsber. d. kgl. Preuss. Akad. d. W.</hi>, 1873, pp. 554 ff.; Huth, <hi>op. cit.</hi>, pp. 32 ff., 49 ff.</note>

<p>Similar evidence can be derived from K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s Pr&amacr;krit, which is plainly more advanced than that of Bh&amacr;sa, while his M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr; can be placed with reasonable assurance after that of the earlier M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr; lyric, which may have flourished in the third and fourth centuries <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> He is also earlier than the Aihole inscription of <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 634, where he is celebrated, than B&amacr;&ndotb;a (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 620), and above all than Vatsabha&tdotb;&tdotb;i&apos;s Mandasor Praçasti of <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 473. It is, therefore, most probable that he flourished under Candragupta II of Ujjayin&imacr;, who ruled up to about <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 413 with the style of Vikram&amacr;ditya, which is perhaps alluded to in the <pb n=147 id=pb147 facs="f:147">name <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>, while the <hi>Kum&amacr;rasambhava&apos;s</hi> title may well hint a compliment on the birth of young Kum&amacr;ragupta, his son and successor.<note n=1 id=n147.1>Keith, JRAS. 1909, pp. 433 ff.; Bloch, ZDMG. lxii. 671 ff.; Liebich, IF. xxxi. 198 ff.; Konow, ID., pp. 59 f.; Winternitz, GIL. iii. 43 f.</note> The <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi> with its marked insistence on the horse sacrifice of the drama seems to suggest a period in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s early activity when the memory of the first horse sacrifice for long performed by an Indian king, that of Samudragupta, was fresh in men&apos;s minds. Moreover the poems of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa are essentially those of the Gupta period, when the Brahmanical and Indian tendencies of the dynasty were in full strength and the menace of foreign attack was for the time evanescent.


<div2 id=ch6.2 n=2>
<head><ab type=divNum>2.</ab> <hi>The Three Dramas of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa</hi></head>

<p>The <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi><note n=2 id=n147.2>Ed. F. Bollensen, Leipzig, 1879; trs. A. Weber, Berlin, 1856; V. Henry, Paris, 1889; C. H. Tawney, London, 1891. The existence of a variant recension is shown by the divergence of a citation from it in comm. on DR. iii. 18 from the manuscript tradition.</note> is unquestionably the first dramatic work<note n=3 id=n147.3>That the <hi>Meghad&umacr;ta</hi> is younger is suggested, not proved, by the lesser lyric power shown (Huth, p. 68). The <hi>&Rdotb;tusa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</hi>, however, is doubtless earlier; its authenticity is demonstrated by me in JRAS. 1912, pp. 1066 ff.; 1913, pp. 410 ff. The relation of the <hi>Kum&amacr;rasambhava</hi> and <hi>Raghuva&ndota;ça</hi> to the two later dramas is uncertain.</note> of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa; he seeks in the prologue to excuse his presumption of presenting a new play when tried favourites such as Bh&amacr;sa, Saumilla, and the Kaviputras exist, and in the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi> also he shows some diffidence, which has disappeared in the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>. The great merits of the poet are far less clearly exhibited here than in his other plays, but the identity of authorship is unquestionable, and was long ago proved by Weber against the doubts of Wilson.

<p>The play, performed at a spring festival, probably at Ujjayin&imacr;, is a N&amacr;&tdotb;aka in five Acts, and depicts a love drama of the type seen already in Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s plays on the theme of Udayana. The heroine M&amacr;lavik&amacr; is a Vidarbha princess, who is destined as the bride of Agnimitra; her brother, M&amacr;dhavasena, however, is captured by his cousin Yajñasena; she escapes and seeks Agnimitra, but <hi>en route</hi> to his capital in Vidiç&amacr; her escort is attacked <pb n=148 id=pb148 facs="f:148">by foresters, perhaps by order of the rival Vidarbha prince; she escapes again, however, and reaches Vidiç&amacr;, where she finds refuge in the home of the queen Dh&amacr;ri&ndotb;&imacr;, who has her trained in the art of dancing. The king happens to see a picture in which she is depicted, and falls in love with her. To arrange an interview is not easy, but Gautama, his Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, provokes a quarrel between two masters of the dance, who have recourse to the king to decide the issue of superiority. He in turn refers the matter to the nun Kauçik&imacr;, who is in reality a partisan of M&amacr;lavik&amacr;, who had been in her charge and that of her brother, who was killed when the escort was dispersed. She bids the masters produce each his best pupil; Ga&ndotb;ad&amacr;sa brings out M&amacr;lavik&amacr;, whose singing and dancing delight all, while her beauty ravishes the king more than ever. She is victorious. In Act III the scene changes to the park, whither comes M&amacr;lavik&amacr; at the bidding of Dh&amacr;ri&ndotb;&imacr; to make the Açoka blossom, according to the ancient belief, by the touch of her foot. The king hidden with the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka behind a thicket watches her, but so also does Ir&amacr;vat&imacr;, the younger of Agnimitra&apos;s queens, who is suspicious and jealous of any rival in the king&apos;s love. The king overhears M&amacr;lavik&amacr;&apos;s conversation with her friend, and realizes that his love is shared; he comes forth and embraces her, but Ir&amacr;vat&imacr; springs out of her hiding-place and insults the king. Dh&amacr;ri&ndotb;&imacr; has M&amacr;lavik&amacr; confined to prevent any further development of the intrigue. The Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, however, proves equal to the occasion with the aid of Kauçik&imacr;; he declares himself bitten by a snake; the only remedy proves to require the use of a stone in the queen&apos;s ring, which is accorded for that purpose, but employed for the more useful end of securing the release of M&amacr;lavik&amacr;, and the meeting of the lovers, which Ir&amacr;vat&imacr;, who has excellent grounds for her vigilance, again disturbs. The king&apos;s embarrassment is fortunately mitigated by the necessity of his going to the rescue of the little princess Vasulak&sdotb;m&imacr;, whom a monkey has frightened. Act V cuts the knot by the advent of two unexpected pieces of news; envoys come bearing the report of victory over the prince of Vidarbha and conveying captives; two young girls introduced before the queen as singers recognize both Kauçik&imacr; and their princess M&amacr;lavik&amacr; among the queen&apos;s attendants, and Kauçik&imacr; explains her silence on the <pb n=149 id=pb149 facs="f:149">princess&apos;s identity by obedience to a prophecy. Further, Pu&sdotb;yamitra, Agnimitra&apos;s father, sends tidings of victory from the north; the son of Dh&amacr;ri&ndotb;&imacr;, Vasumitra, has defeated the Yavanas on the bank of the Indus, while guarding the sacrificial horse, which by ancient law is let loose to roam for a year unfettered before a king can perform rightfully the horse sacrifice, which marks him as emperor. Dh&amacr;ri&ndotb;&imacr; already owes M&amacr;lavik&amacr; a guerdon for her service in causing the Açoka plant to blossom; delighted by the news of her son&apos;s success, she gladly gives Agnimitra authority to marry M&amacr;lavik&amacr;, Ir&amacr;vat&imacr; begs her pardon, and all ends in happiness.

<p>Pu&sdotb;yamitra, Agnimitra, and Vasumitra are clearly taken from the dynasty of the Çu&nmacr;gas, formed by the first through the deposition of the last Maurya in 178 <hi rend=asc>B.C.</hi><note n=1 id=n149.1>For the history, see CHI. i. 519 f.</note> Contact with Yavanas in his time is recorded and the horse sacrifice is doubtless traditional, but equally it may reflect the sacrifice of Samudragupta, the most striking event of the early Gupta history, since it asserted the imperial sway of the family. The rest of the play is based on the normal model.

<p>The <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>,<note n=2 id=n149.2>Ed. F. Bollensen, Leipzig, 1846; S. P. Pa&ndotb;&ddotb;it, Bombay, 1901; M. R. Kale, Bombay, 1898; trs. E. B. Cowell, Hertford, 1851; L. Fritze, Leipzig, 1880<corr>;</corr> E. Lobedanz, Leipzig, 1861. The Beng&amacr;l&imacr; recension is ed. Pischel, <hi lang=de>Monatsber<corr>.</corr> d. kgl. Preuss. Akad. d. W.</hi><corr>,</corr> 1875, pp. 609 ff.</note> by many reckoned as the last work<note n=3 id=n149.3>Cf. Huth, <hi>op. cit.</hi>, pp. 63 ff.</note> in drama of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, seems rather to fall in the interval between the youthful <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi> and the mature perfection of the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>. The theme is that of the love of Pur&umacr;ravas, a king, and Urvaç&imacr;, an Apsaras, or heavenly nymph. The prologue, which has been unjustly suspected of being proof of the incompleteness and therefore later date of the drama, is followed by screams of the nymphs from whom Urvaç&imacr; on her return from Kail&amacr;sa has been torn away by a demon; the king hastens to her aid, recovers her, and restores her first to her friends, and then to the Gandharva king, but not before both have fallen desperately in love. In the entr&apos;acte a servant of the queen extracts cleverly from the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka the secret of the change which has come over the king, his love for Urvaç&imacr;. The king himself then appears; in conversation with the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka he <pb n=150 id=pb150 facs="f:150">declares his love, to meet with scant sympathy; Urvaç&imacr; and a friend appear in the air, and Urvaç&imacr; drops a letter written on birch bark breathing her love; the king reads it and gives it to the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka; Urvaç&imacr;&apos;s friend appears, and finally Urvaç&imacr; herself, but after a brief exchange of love passages Urvaç&imacr; is recalled to play a part in heaven in a drama produced by Bharata. The message, unluckily, falls into the queen&apos;s hands, and she refuses to be appeased by Pur&umacr;ravas&apos;s attempts to soothe her. In the entr&apos;acte before Act II we learn from a conversation between two pupils of Bharata that Urvaç&imacr; was so deeply in love that she played badly her part in the piece on Lak&sdotb;m&imacr;&apos;s wedding; asked whom she loved, she answered Pur&umacr;ravas instead of Puru&sdotb;ottama, Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u&apos;s name, and Bharata cursed her; but Indra intervened and gave her leave to dwell on earth with her love until he had seen the face of her child. The Act that follows shows the king, anxious to please the queen, engaged with her in celebrating the festival of the moon&apos;s union with Rohi&ndotb;&imacr;; Urvaç&imacr; and her friend, in disguise and unseen by the king in a fairy mist, watch his courtesy which fills the nymph with anguish, though her friend assures her that it is mere courtesy. To her joy she finds that the queen has decided to be reconciled, and to permit the king the enjoyment of his beloved; pressed to stay with the king, she refuses, and Urvaç&imacr; joins Pur&umacr;ravas, her friend leaving her, bidding Pur&umacr;ravas to care for her so that she may not miss her friends in the sky.

<p>The prelude to Act IV tells us of misfortune; the nymphs who mourn by the sea her absence learn that, angry at her husband for some trivial cause, she had entered the grove of Kum&amacr;ra, forbidden to women, and been turned into a creeper. In distraction<note n=1 id=n150.1>The prototype here is clearly R&amacr;ma&apos;s search for S&imacr;t&amacr;; <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, iii. 60. The <hi>Sudhan&amacr;vad&amacr;na</hi>, cited by Gawro&nacute;ski (<hi lang=fr>Les sources de quelques drames indiens</hi>, pp. 19, 29) draws probably from the same source.</note> the king seeks for her; he deems the cloud a demon which has stolen her away, demands of the peacock, the cuckoo, the flamingo, the bee, the elephant, the boar, the antelope what has become of her; he deems her transformed into the stream, whose waves are the movements of her eyebrows while the rows of birds in its waters are her girdle; he dances, sings, cries, faints in his madness, or deems the echo to be answering <pb n=151 id=pb151 facs="f:151">him, until a voice from heaven tells him of a magic stone, armed with which he grasps a creeper which in his embrace turns into Urvaç&imacr;.

<p>From this lyric height the drama declines in Act V. The king and his beloved are back in his capital; the moon festival is being celebrated, but the magic stone is stolen by a vulture, which, however, falls pierced by the arrow of a youthful archer; the arrow bears the inscription, &lsquo;the arrow of &Amacr;yus, son of Urvaç&imacr; and Pur&umacr;ravas&rsquo;. The king had known nothing of the child, but, while he is amazed, a woman comes from a hermitage with a gallant boy, who, educated in the duties of his warrior caste, has by his slaying the bird violated the rule of the hermitage and is now returned to his mother. Urvaç&imacr;, summoned, admits her parentage, but, while Pur&umacr;ravas is glad, she weeps to think of their severance, now inevitable, since he has seen his son. But, while Pur&umacr;ravas is ready to abandon the realm to the boy and retire to the forest in grief, N&amacr;rada comes with a message of good tidings; a battle is raging between the gods and the demons; Pur&umacr;ravas&apos;s arms will be necessary, and in reward he may have Urvaç&imacr;&apos;s society for his life.

<p>The play has come down in two recensions, one preserved in Beng&amacr;l&imacr; and Devan&amacr;gar&imacr; manuscripts and commented on by Ra&nmacr;gan&amacr;tha in <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1656, and the other in South Indian manuscripts, commented on by K&amacr;&tdotb;ayavema, minister of the Re&ddotb;&ddotb;i prince, Kum&amacr;ragiri of Ko&ndotb;&ddotb;av&imacr;&ddotb;u about <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1400. The most important among many differences is the fact that in Act IV the northern manuscripts give a series of Apabhra&ndota;ça verses, with directions as to the mode of singing and accompanying them, which are ignored in the southern manuscripts. The northern text calls the play a Tro&tdotb;aka, apparently from the dance which accompanied the verses, the southern a N&amacr;&tdotb;aka which it in essentials is. The arguments against the authenticity of the verses are partly the silence of the theorists, the fact that the existence in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s time of Apabhra&ndota;ça of the type found is more than dubious,<note n=1 id=n151.1>Jacobi, <hi>Bhavisattakaha</hi>, p. 58; Bloch, <hi lang=de>Vararuci und Hemacandra</hi>, pp. 15 f.</note> that there is sometimes a degree of discrepancy between the verses and the prose of the drama, and that in the many imitations of the scene (<hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>, Act IX, <hi>B&amacr;lar&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, Act V, <hi>Prasannar&amacr;ghava</hi>, Act VI, and <hi>Mah&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, <pb n=152 id=pb152 facs="f:152">Act IV) there are no similar verses. These reasons are on the whole conclusive, and the problematic fact that the Pr&amacr;krit of the northern recension is better is not of importance.

<p>The <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi><note n=1 id=n152.1>Beng&amacr;l&imacr; recension, R. Pischel, Kiel, 1877; M. Williams, Hertford, 1876, and M. R. Kale, Bombay, 1908, represent the Devan&amacr;gar&imacr; version, and so mainly S. Ray, Calcutta, 1908; C. Cappeller, Leipzig, 1909. There are South Indian edd., Madras, 1857, 1882. See also Burkhard, <hi>Die Kaçmîrer Çakuntal&amacr;-Handschrift</hi>, Vienna, 1884.</note> certainly represents the perfection of <corr sic="K&amacr;l&imacr;d&amacr;sa&apos;s">K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s</corr> art, and may justly be assumed to belong to his latest period of work. The prologue with his usual skill leads us up to the picture of the king in swift pursuit of an antelope entering the outskirts of the hermitage; warned of the sacred character of the spot, the king alights from his chariot and decides to pay his respects to the holy man whose hermitage it is; he is absent, but Çakuntal&amacr;, his foster-daughter, is there with her friends; pursued by a bee she calls for help; they reply that Du&hdotb;&sdotb;anta the king should aid as the hermitage is under his protection, and the king gallantly comes forward to help. From the maidens he elicits the tale of Çakuntal&amacr;&apos;s birth; she is daughter of Viçv&amacr;mitra and Menak&amacr;, and is being reared not for the religious life but for marriage to some worthy one. The king loves and the maiden begins to reciprocate his affection, when the news that a wild elephant is menacing the hermitage takes him away. Act II reveals his Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka groaning over the toils of the king&apos;s hunting. But the king gives order for the hunt to end, not to please the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka but for Çakuntal&amacr;&apos;s sake, and, while he recounts his feelings to his unsympathetic friend, receives with keen satisfaction the request of the young hermits to protect the hermitage against the attacks of demons. The Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka he gets rid of by sending him back to the capital to take part in a festival there, assuring him, in order to prevent domestic trouble, that his remarks about Çakuntal&amacr; were not serious. In the entr&apos;acte before Act III a young Brahmin praises the deeds of Du&hdotb;&sdotb;anta, and we learn that Çakuntal&amacr; is unwell, and her maidens are troubled regarding her state, as she is the very life breath of Ka&ndotb;va. The Act itself depicts Çakuntal&amacr; with her maidens; she is deeply in love and writes a letter at their suggestion: the king who has overheard all comes on the scene and a dialogue follows, in which both the king and the maiden express their feelings; the scene is <pb n=153 id=pb153 facs="f:153">ended by the arrival of the nun Gautam&imacr; to fetch away her charge. The entr&apos;acte that follows tells us from the conversation of Priya&mdota;vad&amacr; and Anas&umacr;y&amacr;, Çakuntal&amacr;&apos;s dear friends, that the king after his marriage with Çakuntal&amacr; has departed and seems to have forgotten her; while Ka&ndotb;va is about to return and knows nothing of the affair. A loud cry interrupts them; Çakuntal&amacr; in her love-sickness has failed to pay due respect to the harsh ascetic Durv&amacr;sas, who has come to visit the hermitage: he curses her, and all the entreaties of her friends succeed in no more than mitigating the harshness of his curse; she will be forgotten by her husband, not indeed for ever, but until she presents to him the ring he gave her in token of their union. The curse is essential; the whole action of the play depends on it. The Act itself tells us that the difficulty regarding Ka&ndotb;va has been solved; a voice from the sky has informed him at the moment of his return of the marriage and Çakuntal&amacr;&apos;s approaching maternity. He has decided to send her under escort to the king. Then follows a scene of intense pathos; the aged hermit unwillingly parts with his beloved foster-daughter, with words of advice for her future life, and Çakuntal&amacr; is desolated to leave him, her friends, and all that she has loved at the hermitage.

<p>Act V shows us the king in his court, overwhelmed with the duties of office, for K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa takes care to show us Du&hdotb;&sdotb;anta as the great and good monarch. News is brought that hermits with women desire an interview, while a song is heard in which the queen Ha&ndota;savat&imacr; laments the king&apos;s faithlessness to her; the king dispatches the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka to solace her, and receives in state the hermits. They bring him his wife, but, under the malign influence of the curse, he does not recognize her and cannot receive her. The hermits reprove him, and insist on leaving her, refusing her the right to go with them, since her duty is by her husband&apos;s side. The king&apos;s priest is willing to give her the safety of his house till the babe be born, but a figure of light in female shape appears and bears Çakuntal&amacr; away, leaving the king still unrecognizing, but filled with wonder. In the entr&apos;acte which follows a vital element is contributed; policemen mishandle a fisherman accused of theft of a royal ring found in a fish which he has caught; it is Du&hdotb;&sdotb;anta&apos;s ring which Çakuntal&amacr; had dropped while bathing. The Act that follows tells us of the <pb n=154 id=pb154 facs="f:154">recognition by the king of the wrong unwittingly done and his grief at the loss of his wife; he seeks to console himself with her portrait, when he is interrupted by a lady of the harem, and then by the minister, who obtains from him the decision of a law case involving the right of succession; the episode reminds the king of his childlessness. From his despair the king is awakened by the screams of the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka who has been roughly handled by M&amacr;tali, Indra&apos;s charioteer, as an effective means of bringing the king back to the realization that there are duties superior to private feeling. The gods need his aid for battle. In Act VII Du&hdotb;&sdotb;anta is revealed victorious, and travelling with M&amacr;tali in a divine car high through the air to Hemak&umacr;&tdotb;a, where dwells in the place of supreme bliss the seer M&amacr;r&imacr;ca and his wife. Here the king sees a gallant boy playfully pulling about a young lion to the terror of two maidens who accompany him in the dress of the hermitage; they ask the king to intervene with the child in the cub&apos;s interest, and the king feels a pang as he thinks of his sonlessness. To his amazement he learns that this is no hermit&apos;s son, but his own; Çakuntal&amacr; is revealed to him in the dress of an ascetic, and M&amacr;r&imacr;ca crowns their happiness by making it clear to Çakuntal&amacr; that her husband was guiltless of the sorrow inflicted upon her.

<p>A drama so popular has naturally enough failed to come down to us in a single recension.<note n=1 id=n154.1>Konow, ID., pp. 67 f.; Hari Chand, <hi>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa</hi>, pp. 243 ff.; B. K. Thakore, <hi>The Text of the &Sacute;akuntal&amacr;</hi> (1922); Windisch, <hi>Sansk. Phil.</hi> pp. 344 f.</note> Four are normally distinguished, Beng&amacr;l&imacr;, Devan&amacr;gar&imacr;, K&amacr;çm&imacr;r&imacr;, and South Indian, while a fifth may also be traced. There are, however, in reality, two main recensions, the Beng&amacr;l&imacr;, with 221 stanzas, as fixed by the commentators Ça&nmacr;kara and Candraçekhara, and the Devan&amacr;gar&imacr;, with 194 stanzas, of R&amacr;ghavabha&tdotb;&tdotb;a; the K&amacr;çm&imacr;r&imacr;, which supplies an entr&apos;acte to Act VII, is in the main an eclectic combination of these two representatives of North Indian texts, and the South Indian is closely akin to the Devan&amacr;gar&imacr;; Abhir&amacr;ma and K&amacr;&tdotb;ayavema among others have commented on it. The evidence of superior merit is conflicting; Pischel<note n=2 id=n154.2><hi lang=la>De Kâlidâsae Çâkuntali recensionibus</hi> (1870); <hi lang=de>Die Recensionen der Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> (1875).</note> laid stress on the more correct Pr&amacr;krit of the Beng&amacr;l&imacr; and the fact that some readings in <pb n=155 id=pb155 facs="f:155">the Devan&amacr;gar&imacr; are best explained as glosses on the Beng&amacr;l&imacr; text, while Lévi<note n=1 id=n155.1>TI. ii. 37. The erotic passages in Act III in the Beng&amacr;l&imacr; recension must be judged by Indian taste; cf. Thakore, p. <corr sic="13f or">13 for</corr> a condemnation.</note> proved that Har&sdotb;a and R&amacr;jaçekhara knew the Beng&amacr;l&imacr; recension in some shape. On the other hand, Weber<note n=2 id=n155.2>IS. xiv. 35 ff., 161 ff. Cf. Bühler, <hi>Kashmir Report</hi>, pp. lxxxv ff.</note> contended for the priority of the Devan&amacr;gar&imacr;; certainly some readings there are better, and some of the Beng&amacr;l&imacr; stanzas are mere repetitions of others found in both texts. Unless we adopt the not very plausible view of Bollensen that the Devan&amacr;gar&imacr; version is the acting edition of the play revised for representation, we must hold that neither recension is of conclusive value: the argument from the Pr&amacr;krit is not conclusive, for it may merely rest on the superior knowledge of the copyists from whom the Beng&amacr;l&imacr; original ultimately issued.<note n=3 id=n155.3>Cf. above, p. 121, n. 1 as to the variation in correctness in different classes of MSS.</note>


<div2 id=ch6.3 n=3>
<head><ab type=divNum>3.</ab> <hi>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s Dramatic Art</hi></head>

<p>The order of plays here adopted is in precise harmony with the development in a harmonious manner of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s dramatic art. The <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi> is essentially a work of youthful promise and some achievement;<note n=4 id=n155.4>For a warm eulogy, see V. Henry, <hi lang=fr>Les littératures de l&apos;Inde</hi>, pp. 305 ff.</note> the theme is one less banal probably in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s time than it became later when every N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr; was based on an analogous plot, and there is some skill in the manner in which the events are interlaced; the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka&apos;s <corr sic=strategems>stratagems</corr> to secure his master the sight of his beloved are amusing, and, though Agnimitra appears mainly as a love-sick hero, the reports of battles and victories reminds us adequately of his kingly functions and high importance. The most effective characterization, however, is reserved for the two queens, Dh&amacr;ri&ndotb;&imacr; and Ir&amacr;vat&imacr;: the grace and dignity, and finally the magnanimity of the former, despite just cause for anger, are set off effectively against the passionate impetuosity of the latter, which leads her to constant eavesdropping, and to an outbreak against the king, forgetful of his rank and rights. The heroine is herself but faintly presented, but her friend Kauçik&imacr;, who has been driven by a series of misfortunes to enter the religious life, is a noble <pb n=156 id=pb156 facs="f:156">figure; she comforts and distracts the mind of Dh&amacr;ri&ndotb;&imacr;; she is an authority on the dance and on the cure for snake bite, and alone among the women she speaks Sanskrit. The Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka is an essential element in the drama, and he plays rather the part of a friend and confidant of the king than his jester; without his skilled aid Agnimitra would have languished in vain for his inamorata. But on the other hand he contributes comparatively little to the comic side of the drama.

<p>In the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi> K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa shows a marked advance in imagination. We have no precise information of the source he followed; the story is old, it occurs in an obscure form in the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi>, and is degraded to sacrificial application in the <hi>Çatapatha Br&amacr;hma&ndotb;a</hi>; it is also found in a number of Pur&amacr;&ndotb;as, and in the <hi>Matsya</hi><note n=1 id=n156.1>xxiv; <hi>Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u</hi>, iv. 6; <hi>Bh&amacr;gavata</hi>, ix. 14; Pischel and Geldner, <hi>Ved. Stud.</hi> i. 243 ff.; L. v. Schroeder, <hi lang=de>Mysterium und Mimus</hi>, pp. 242 ff. A. Gawro&nacute;ski (<hi lang=fr>Les sources de quelques drames indiens</hi>, pp. 19 ff.) suggests a popular legend, comparing the <hi>Sudhan&amacr;vad&amacr;na</hi>, No. 30 of the <hi>Divy&amacr;vad&amacr;na</hi>.</note> there is a fairly close parallel to K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s version, for the motif of the nymph&apos;s transformation into a creeper, instead of a swan, is already present, Pur&umacr;ravas&apos;s mad search for her is known as well as his rescue of her from a demon. The passionate and undisciplined love of Urvaç&imacr; is happily displayed, but it is somewhat too far removed from normal life to charm; her magic power to watch her lover unseen and to overhear his conversation is as unnatural as the singular lack of maternal affection which induces her to abandon forthwith her child rather than lose her husband; her love is selfish; she forgets her duty of respect to the gods in her dramatic act, and her transformation is the direct outcome of a fit of insane jealousy. The hero sinks to a diminutive stature beside her, and, effective in the extreme as is his passionate despair in Act IV, his lack of self-restraint and manliness is obvious and distasteful. The minor characters are handled with comparative lack of success; the incident of the boy &Amacr;yus is forced, and the ending of the drama ineffective and flat. The Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, however, introduces an element of comedy in the stupidity by which he allows himself to be cheated out of the name of Urvaç&imacr;, and the clumsiness which permits the nymph&apos;s letter to fall into the hands of the queen. The latter, Auç&imacr;nar&imacr;, is a dignified and more attractive figure than the nymph; <pb n=157 id=pb157 facs="f:157">like Agnimitra in his scene with Ir&amacr;vat&imacr;, Pur&umacr;ravas cuts a sorry figure beside her, seeing how just cause she had to be vexed at his lack of faith and candour towards her.

<p>In the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa handles again with far more perfect art many of the incidents found in his earlier drama. He does not hesitate to repeat himself; we have in the first and third Acts the pretty idea of the king in concealment hearing the confidential talk of the heroine and her friends; the same motif is found in Act III of the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi>. Like Urvaç&imacr;, Çakuntal&amacr;, when she leaves the king, makes a pretext&mdash;her foot pricked by a thorn and her tunic caught by a branch&mdash;to delay her going; in the same way both express their love by letters; the snatching by a bird of the magic stone in the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi> is paralleled by M&amacr;tali&apos;s seizure of the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka in Act VI; &Amacr;yus has a peacock to play with, as the little Bharata a lion, but in each case the comparison is all to the good of the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>. The same maturity is seen in the changes made in the narrative of the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;rata</hi><note n=1 id=n157.1>i. 74. Winternitz&apos;s denial (GIL., i. 319 f.) of priority is impossible; cf. Gawro&nacute;ski, <hi lang=fr>Les sources de quelques drames indiens</hi>, pp. 40, 91.</note> which the poet had before him. The story there is plain and simple; the king arrives at the hermitage; the maiden recounts to him her ancestry without false shame; he proposes marriage; she argues, and, on being satisfied of the legality of a secret union, agrees on the understanding that her son shall be made heir apparent. The king goes away; the child grows up, until at the due season the mother, accompanied by hermits, takes him to court; the hermits leave her, but she is undaunted when the king out of policy refuses to recognize her; she threatens him with death and taunts him with her higher birth; finally, a divine voice bids the king consecrate the child, and he explains that his action was due solely in order to have it made plain that the child was the rightful prince. This simple tale is transformed; the shy heroine would not dream of telling her birth; her maidens even are too modest to do more than hint, and leave the experienced king to guess the rest. Çakuntal&amacr;&apos;s dawning love is depicted with perfect skill; her marriage and its sequel alluded to with delicate touches. The king&apos;s absurd conduct is now explained; a curse produces it, and for that curse Çakuntal&amacr; was not without responsibility, for she allowed her <pb n=158 id=pb158 facs="f:158">love to make her forgetful of the essential duty of hospitality and reverence to the stranger and saint. Before the king she utters no threat but behaves with perfect dignity, stunned as she is by his repudiation of their love. The king is a worthy hero, whose devotion to his public duties and heroism are insisted on, and who deserves by reason of his unselfishness to be reunited with his wife. His love for his son is charmingly depicted, and, accepting as an Indian must do the validity of the curse,<note n=1 id=n158.1>The absurd silence as to M&amacr;lavik&amacr;&apos;s origin in the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi> is rendered acceptable by belief in prophecy.</note> his conduct is irreproachable; it is not that he despises the lovely maiden that he repulses her, but as a pattern of virtue and morality he cannot accept as his wife one of whom he knows nothing. Çakuntal&amacr;&apos;s own love for him is purified by her suffering, and, when she is finally united to him, she is no longer a mere loving girl, but one who has suffered tribulation of spirit and gained in depth and beauty of nature.

<p>The other characters are models of skilful presentation. K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa here shakes himself free from the error of presenting any other woman in competition with Çakuntal&amacr;; Du&hdotb;&sdotb;anta is much married, but though Ha&ndota;savat&imacr; deplores his faithlessness he does not meet her, and, when Vasumat&imacr; enters in Act VI, the effect is saved by the entry of the minister to ask the king to decide a point of law. The Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, who would have ruined the love idyll, is cleverly dismissed on other business in Act II, while he serves the more useful end of introducing comic relief; M&amacr;tali playfully terrifies him to rouse the king from his own sorrows. Ka&ndotb;va is a delightful figure, the ascetic, without child, who lavishes on his adopted daughter all the wealth of his deep affection, and who sends her to her husband with words of tender advice; he is brilliantly contrasted with the fierce pride and anger of Durv&amacr;sas who curses Çakuntal&amacr; for what is no more than a girlish fault, and the solemn majesty of M&amacr;r&imacr;ca, who, though married, has abandoned all earthly thoughts and enjoys the happiness of release, while yet contemplating the affairs of the world and intervening to set them in order with purely disinterested zeal The companions of the heroine are painted with delicate taste; both are devoted body and soul to their mistress, but Anas&umacr;y&amacr; is serious and sensible; Priya&mdota;vad&amacr; <pb n=159 id=pb159 facs="f:159">talkative and gay. There is a contrast between the two hermits who take Çakuntal&amacr; to the court; Ç&amacr;r&nmacr;garava shows the pride and hauteur of his calling, and severely rebukes the king; Ç&amacr;radvata is calm and restrained and admonishes him in lieu. Equally successful is the delineation of the police officers, whose unjust and overbearing conduct to the fisherman represents the spirit of Indian police from the first appearance in history. The supernatural, which is in excess in the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>, is reduced to modest dimensions, and intervenes hardly at all in the play, until we come to the last Act, where the theory permits and even demands that the marvellous should be introduced, and the celestial hermitage is a fit place for the reunion of two lovers severed by so hard a fate. The episode of the ring whose loss prevents the immediate recognition of the heroine is effectively conceived and woven into the plot.

<p>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa excels in depicting the emotions of love, from the first suggestion in an innocent mind to the perfection of passion; he is hardly less expert in pathos; the fourth Act of the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> is a model of tender sorrow, and the loving kindness with which even the trees take farewell of their beloved one contrasts with the immediate harsh reception which awaits her at the royal court. K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa here, as in the fourth Act of the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi> and in the garden scenes of the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi>, displays admirably his love for nature and his power of description of all the stock elements of Indian scenery, the mango, the Bimba fruit, the Açoka, the lotus, and his delicate appreciation of the animal world of India. In the last Act of the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> also we have the graceful picture of the appearance of the earth viewed in perspective from the celestial car of M&amacr;tali.

<p>The humour of the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka is never coarse; his fondness for food is admitted; cakes and sugar suggest themselves to him when the hero admires the moon or is sick of love; heroics he despises: the king is summarily compared to a thief in his dislike for discovery; if caught, he should imitate the latter who explains that he was learning the art of wall breaking. Or again, he is in his contempt for the ladies of his harem like one sated of sweet dates and desiring the bitter tamarind. M&amacr;lavik&amacr; is summarily treated; she is like a cuckoo caught by a cat when Dh&amacr;ri&ndotb;&imacr; places her in confinement, but he is no more respectful <pb n=160 id=pb160 facs="f:160">of himself, for, seized by M&amacr;tali, he treats himself as a mouse in mortal fear of a cat. Best of all is his description in Act II of the miseries brought on him by <corr sic="Du&hdotb;santa&apos;s">Du&hdotb;&sdotb;anta&apos;s</corr> hunting; the Brahmins were no admirers of the sport, though they had to acquiesce in it in kings, and the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka&apos;s picture is vivid in the extreme.

<p>The range of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s technical knowledge is apparent in his skilled use of the dance and song to set off his dramas; the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi> contains an interesting exposition by the dancing master of the theory of the art and its importance; not only is M&amacr;lavik&amacr; a dancer, but Çakuntal&amacr; shows her skill in movement in Act I. The songs of the trees and of Ha&ndota;savat&imacr; in the same play enable him to add a fresh interest to the drama, and in the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi> spectacular effects seem to have been aimed at, while in the Beng&amacr;l&imacr; recension song is prominently introduced in Act IV of the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>.

<p>Admirable as is K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s work, it would be unjust to ignore the fact that in his dramas as in his epics he shows no interest in the great problems of life and destiny. The admiration of Goethe and the style of the Shakespeare of India accorded by Sir William Jones,<note n=1 id=n160.1>See S. D. and A. B. Gajendragadkar, <hi><corr sic="Abhijñ&amacr;naç&amacr;kuntala">Abhijñ&amacr;naçakuntal&amacr;</corr></hi>, pp. xxxvi ff.; below, chap. xii.</note> the first to translate the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, are deserved, but must not blind us to the narrow range imposed on K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s interests by his unfeigned devotion to the Brahmanical creed of his time. Assured, as he was, that all was governed by a just fate which man makes for himself by his own deeds, he was incapable of viewing the world as a tragic scene, of feeling any sympathy for the hard lot of the majority of men, or appreciating the reign of injustice in the world. It was impossible for him to go beyond his narrow range; we may be grateful that, confined as he was, he accomplished a work of such enduring merit and universal appeal as <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, which even in the ineffective guise of translations has won general recognition as a masterpiece.


<div2 id=ch6.4 n=4>
<head><ab type=divNum>4.</ab> <hi>The Style</hi></head>

<p>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa represents the highest pitch of elegance attained in Sanskrit style of the elevated K&amacr;vya character; he is master of the Vaidarbha style, the essentials of which are the absence of <pb n=161 id=pb161 facs="f:161">compounds or the rare use of them, and harmony of sound as well as clearness, elevation, and force allied to beauty, such as is conveyed to language by the use of figures of speech and thought. He is simple, as are Bh&amacr;sa and the author of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, but with an elegance and refinement which are not found in these two writers; Açvagho&sdotb;a, we may be sure, influenced his style, but the chief cause of its perfection must have been natural taste and constant reworking of what he had written, a fact which may easily explain the discrepancies between the recensions of his work. But his skill in the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> never leads him into the defect of taste which betrayed his successors into exhibiting their skill in the wrong place; skilled as he is in description, and ready as he is to exhibit his power, in the fifth Act he refrains from inserting any of these ornamental stanzas which add nothing to the action, however much honour they may do to the skill of the poet. His language has also the merit of suggestiveness; what Bhavabh&umacr;ti, the greatest of his successors, expresses at length, he is content to indicate by a touch. He is admirably clear, and the propriety of his style is no less admirable; the language of the policeman and the fisher is as delicately nuanced as that of the domestic priest who argues at once in the best style of the philosophical S&umacr;tras. The Pr&amacr;krit which he ascribes to the maidens of his play has the supreme merit that it utterly eschews elaborate constructions and long compounds, such as Bhavabh&umacr;ti places without thought of the utter incongruity in the mouths of simple girls.

<p>The rhetoricians<note n=1 id=n161.1>See Hari Chand, <hi lang=fr>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa et l&apos;art poétique de l&apos;Inde</hi> (1917), pp. 68 ff. On his suggestiveness, cf. <hi>Ek&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, p. 52.</note> extol the merits of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa in metaphor, and they repeatedly cite his skill in the use of figures of speech, sound and thought, which they divide and subdivide in endless variety. He excels in vivid description (<hi>svabh&amacr;vokti</hi>) as when he depicts the flight of the antelope which Du&hdotb;&sdotb;anta pursues to the hermitage:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>gr&imacr;v&amacr;bha&nmacr;g&amacr;bhir&amacr;mam muhur anupatati syandane baddhad&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;i&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>paçc&amacr;rdhena pravi&sdotb;&tdotb;a&hdotb; çarapatanabhay&amacr;d bh&umacr;yas&amacr; p&umacr;rvak&amacr;yam</hi>
    <l><hi>darbhair ardh&amacr;val&imacr;&ddotb;hai&hdotb; çramaviv&rdotb;tamukhabhra&ndota;çibhi&hdotb; k&imacr;r&ndotb;avartm&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>paçyodagraplutatv&amacr;d viyati bahutara&mdota; stokam urvy&amacr;&mdota; pray&amacr;ti.</hi>
</lg>

<pb n=162 id=pb162 facs="f:162"><p rend=noindent>&lsquo;His glance fixed on the chariot, ever and anon he leaps up, gracefully bending his neck; through fear of the arrow&apos;s fall he draws ever his hinder part into the front of his body; he strews his path with the grass, half chewed, which drops from his mouth opened in weariness; so much aloft he bounds that he runs rather in the air than on earth.&rsquo; Inferential knowledge is illustrated by a brilliant stanza:<note n=1 id=n162.1><hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, i. 15.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>ç&amacr;ntam idam &amacr;çramapada&mdota; sphurati ca b&amacr;hu&hdotb; phalam ih&amacr;sya</hi>
    <l><hi>atha v&amacr; bhavitavy&amacr;n&amacr;&mdota; dv&amacr;r&amacr;&ndotb;i bhavanti sarvatra.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;This is the hermitage where all desires are stilled; yet my arm throbs; how can here be found the fruit of such a presage? Nay, the doors of fate are ever open.&rsquo; The rôle of conscience in human action is finely portrayed:<note n=2 id=n162.2><hi>Ibid.</hi>, i. 20.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>asa&mdota;çaya&mdota; k&sdotb;atraparigrahak&sdotb;am&amacr;: yad &amacr;ryam <corr sic="asy&amacr;abhil&amacr;&sdotb;i">asy&amacr;m abhil&amacr;&sdotb;i</corr> me mana&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>sat&amacr;&mdota; hi sa&mdota;dehapade&sdotb;u <corr sic="v&amacr;stu&sdotb;u">vastu&sdotb;u</corr>: pram&amacr;&ndotb;am anta&hdotb;kara&ndotb;aprav&rdotb;ttaya&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Assuredly the maiden is meet for marriage to a warrior, since my noble mind is set upon her; for with the good in matters of doubt the final authority is the dictate of conscience.&rsquo; Of the departing Çakuntal&amacr; after her rejection the king says:<note n=3 id=n162.3><hi>Ibid.</hi>, vi. 9.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>ita&hdotb; praty&amacr;deç&amacr;t svajanam anugantu&mdota; vyavasit&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>muhus ti&sdotb;&tdotb;hety uccair vadati guruçi&sdotb;ye gurusame</hi>
    <l><hi>punar d&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;i&mdota; b&amacr;&sdotb;paprasarakalu&sdotb;&amacr;m arpitavat&imacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>mayi kr&umacr;re yat tat savi&sdotb;am iva çalya&mdota; dahati m&amacr;m.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;When I rejected her she sought to regain her companions, but the disciple, in his master&apos;s stead, loudly bade her stay; then she turned on cruel me a glance dimmed by her falling tears, and that now burns me like a poisoned arrow.&rsquo; At his son&apos;s touch he says:<note n=4 id=n162.4><hi>Ibid.</hi>, vii. 19.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>anena kasy&amacr;pi kul&amacr;&nmacr;kure&ndotb;a: sp&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;asya g&amacr;tre&sdotb;u sukha&mdota; mamaivam</hi>
    <l><hi>k&amacr;&mdota; nirv&rdotb;tti&mdota; cetasi tasya kury&amacr;d: yasy&amacr;yam a&nmacr;g&amacr;t k&rdotb;tina&hdotb; prar&umacr;&ddotb;ha&hdotb;?</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;When such joy is mine in the touch on my limbs of a scion of some other house, what gladness must not be his, from whose <pb n=163 id=pb163 facs="f:163">loins, happy man, this child is sprung?&rsquo; The punishment of the king for his disloyalty is severe:<note n=1 id=n163.1><hi>Ibid.</hi>, vi. 22.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>praj&amacr;gar&amacr;t khil&imacr;bh&umacr;tas tasy&amacr;&hdotb; svapne sam&amacr;gama&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>b&amacr;&sdotb;pas tu na dad&amacr;ty en&amacr;&mdota; dra&sdotb;&tdotb;u&mdota; citragat&amacr;m api.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;My sleeplessness forbids the sight of her even in a dream; my tears deny me her pictured form.&rsquo; On reunion the picture is very different:<note n=2 id=n163.2><hi>Ibid.</hi>, vii. 32.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>ç&amacr;p&amacr;d asi pratihat&amacr; sm&rdotb;tirodhar&umacr;k&sdotb;e: bhartary apetatamasi prabhut&amacr; tavaiva</hi>
    <l><hi>ch&amacr;y&amacr; na m&umacr;rchati malopahatapras&amacr;de: çuddhe tu darpa&ndotb;atale sulabh&amacr;vak&amacr;ç&amacr;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Thou wert rejected by thy husband, cruel through the curse that robbed him of memory; now thy dominion is complete over him whose darkness is dispelled; on the tarnished mirror no image forms; let it be cleaned and it easily appears.&rsquo;

<p>There is pathos in Pur&umacr;ravas&apos;s reproach to Urvaç&imacr;:<note n=3 id=n163.3><hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>, iv. 55.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>tvayi nibaddharate&hdotb; priyav&amacr;dina&hdotb;: pra&ndotb;ayabha&nmacr;gapar&amacr;&nmacr;mukhacetasa&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>kam apar&amacr;dhalavam mama paçyasi: tyajasi m&amacr;nini d&amacr;sajana&mdota; yata&hdotb;?</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent><corr>&lsquo;</corr>My delight was ever in thee, my words ever of love; what suspicion of fault dost thou see in me that, O angry one, thou dost abandon thy slave?&rsquo; The metrical effect is here, as usual, extremely well planned. His vain efforts to attain his beloved are depicted forcibly:<note n=4 id=n163.4><hi>Ibid.</hi>, iv. 68.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>samarthaye yat prathamam priy&amacr;m prati: k&sdotb;a&ndotb;ena tan me parivartate &lsquo;nyath&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>ato vinidre sahas&amacr; vilocane: karomi na sparçavibh&amacr;vitapriya&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Whatever I deem to be my beloved in a moment assumes another aspect. I will force my eyes to be sleepless, since I have failed to touch her whom I adore.&rsquo; There are no limits to the strength of his love:<note n=5 id=n163.5><hi>Ibid.</hi>, iii. 11; for the text see Hari Chand, <hi>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa</hi>, p. 231.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>ida&mdota; tvay&amacr; rathak&sdotb;obh&amacr;d a&nmacr;gen&amacr;&nmacr;ga&mdota; nip&imacr;&ddotb;itam</hi>
    <l><hi>eka&mdota; k&rdotb;ti çar&imacr;re &apos;smiñ çe&sdotb;am a&nmacr;gam bhuvo bhara&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<pb n=164 id=pb164 facs="f:164"><p rend=noindent>&lsquo;In this body no member has value save that which, thanks to the movement of the chariot, she has touched; all else is a mere burden to the earth.&rsquo; Hyperbole<note n=1 id=n164.1><hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>, iii. 19.</note> is permissible<corr sic=.>:</corr>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>s&amacr;mantamaulima&ndotb;irañjitap&amacr;dap&imacr;&tdotb;ham: ek&amacr;tapatram avaner na tath&amacr; prabhutvam</hi>
    <l><hi>asy&amacr;&hdotb; sakhe cara&ndotb;ayor aham adya k&amacr;ntam: &amacr;jñ&amacr;karatvam adhigamya yath&amacr; k&rdotb;t&amacr;rtha&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Despite the radiance shed on my footstool by the jewelled diadems of vassal princes, despite the subjection of the whole earth to my sway, not so much joy did I gain from attaining kingship as the satisfaction won from paying homage to the feet of that lady, O my friend.&rsquo; The recovery of the nymph from her faint caused by the savage onslaught upon her is described in a happy series of similes:<note n=2 id=n164.2><hi>Ibid.</hi>, i. 9. The parallelism<corr sic=","></corr> is, of course, complete in Sanskrit, but inexpressible directly in English.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>&amacr;virbh&umacr;te çaçini tamas&amacr; ricyam&amacr;neva r&amacr;trir</hi>
    <l><hi>naiçasy&amacr;rcir hutabhuja iva cchinnabh&umacr;yi&sdotb;&tdotb;hadh&umacr;m&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>mohen&amacr;ntar varatanur iya&mdota; lak&sdotb;yate mucyam&amacr;n&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>ga&nmacr;g&amacr; rodha&hdotb;patanakalu&sdotb;&amacr; gacchat&imacr;va pras&amacr;dam.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;As the night, freed from the darkness when the moon has appeared, as the light of a fire in the evening when the smoke has nearly all gone, so appears this lady fair, recovering from her faint, and winning back her calmness, like the Ganges after her stream has been troubled by the falling of her banks.&rsquo;

<p>The <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi>, it is true, has far fewer beauties of diction than the other two dramas, but it contains many verses which are unmistakably the work of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, though they present much less than the maturity of his later style. The figure of discrepancy (<hi lang=sa-Latn>vi&sdotb;ama</hi>) is illustrated by the description of the god of love whose bow, so innocent in seeming, can yet work such ill:<note n=3 id=n164.3><hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi>, iii. 2.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>kva ruj&amacr; h&rdotb;dayapram&amacr;thin&imacr;: kva ca te viçvasan&imacr;yam &amacr;yudham</hi>
    <l><hi>m&rdotb;dut&imacr;k&sdotb;&ndotb;atara&mdota; yad ucyate: tad idam manmatha d&rdotb;çyate tvayi.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;How strange the difference between this pain that wrings the heart, and thy bow to all seeming so harmless. That which is <pb n=165 id=pb165 facs="f:165">most sweet and most bitter at once is assuredly found in thee, O God of Love.&rsquo; Agnimitra is ready enough with a pun, when M&amacr;lavik&amacr;, on being bidden to show fearlessly her love towards him, slyly reminds him that she has seen him as terrified as herself of the queen:<note n=1 id=n165.1><hi>Ibid.</hi>, iv. 14.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>d&amacr;k&sdotb;i&ndotb;ya&mdota; n&amacr;ma bimbo&sdotb;&tdotb;hi baimbik&amacr;n&amacr;&mdota; kulavratam</hi>
    <l><hi>tan me d&imacr;rgh&amacr;k&sdotb;i ye pr&amacr;&ndotb;&amacr;s te tvad&amacr;ç&amacr;nibandhan&amacr;&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent><corr>&lsquo;</corr>Politeness, O Bimba-lipped one, is the family tradition of the descendants of Bimbaka; nevertheless, what life I have depends entirely on the hope of thy favour.&rsquo; The excellent Kauçik&imacr; consoles and comforts Dh&amacr;ri&ndotb;&imacr; with her approval of her acts:<note n=2 id=n165.2><hi>Ibid.</hi>, v. 19.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>pratipak&sdotb;e&ndotb;&amacr;pi pati&mdota; sevante bhart&rdotb;vatsal&amacr;&hdotb; s&amacr;dhvya&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>anyasarit&amacr;m api jala&mdota; samudrag&amacr;&hdotb; pr&amacr;payanty udadhim.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Even to the extent of admitting a rival, noble ladies, who love their spouses, honour their husbands; the great rivers bear to the ocean the waters of many a tributary stream.&rsquo; There is an amusing directness and homeliness in the king&apos;s utterance on learning of the true quality of M&amacr;lavik&amacr;:<note n=3 id=n165.3><hi>Ibid.</hi>, v. 12.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>pre&sdotb;yabh&amacr;vena n&amacr;meya&mdota; dev&imacr;çabdak&sdotb;am&amacr; sat&imacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>sn&amacr;n&imacr;yavastrakriyay&amacr; patror&ndotb;a&mdota; vopayujyate.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;This lady, fit to bear the title of queen, has been treated as a maid-servant, even as one might use a garment of woven silk for a bathing cloth.&rsquo; But K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa shows himself equal to the expression of more manly sentiments as well; the nun thus tells of her brother&apos;s fall in the effort to save M&amacr;lavik&amacr; when the foresters attack them:<note n=4 id=n165.4><hi>Ibid.</hi>, v. 11.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>im&amacr;m par&imacr;psur durj&amacr;te par&amacr;bhibhavak&amacr;tar&amacr;m</hi>
    <l><hi>bhart&rdotb;priya&hdotb; priyair bhartur &amacr;n&rdotb;&ndotb;yam asubhir gata&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p>&lsquo;Eager in this misfortune to protect her, terrified by the enemy&apos;s onslaught, he paid with his dear life his debt of affection to the lord whom he loved.&rsquo; The king&apos;s reply is manly: <hi lang=sa-Latn>bhagavati tanutyaj&amacr;m &imacr;d&rdotb;ç&imacr; lokay&amacr;tr&amacr;: na çocya&mdota; tatrabhav&amacr;n saphal&imacr;k&rdotb;tabhart&rdotb;pi&ndotb;&ddotb;a&hdotb;.</hi> &lsquo;O lady, such is the fate of brave men; thou must not mourn for him who showed himself thus worthy of his master&apos;s salt.&rsquo;



<pb n=166 id=pb166 facs="f:166">
<div2 id=ch6.5 n=5>
<head><ab type=divNum>5.</ab> <hi>The Language and the Metres</hi></head>

<p>In K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa we find the normal state of the Pr&amacr;krits in the later drama, Çaurasen&imacr; for the prose speeches, and M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr; for the verses.<note n=1 id=n166.1>Traces of Çaurasen&imacr; in verses appear in the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>. Cf. Hillebrandt, <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, p. iii; GN. 1905, p. 440.</note> The police officers and the fisher in the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> use M&amacr;gadh&imacr;, but the king&apos;s brother-in-law, who is in charge of the police and is a faint echo of the Çak&amacr;ra, speaks, as we have the drama, neither Ç&amacr;k&amacr;r&imacr; nor M&amacr;gadh&imacr; nor D&amacr;k&sdotb;i&ndotb;&amacr;ty&amacr; but simply Çaurasen&imacr;. By this time, of course, we may assume that Pr&amacr;krit for the drama had been stereotyped by the authority of Vararuci&apos;s Pr&amacr;krit grammar, and that it differed considerably from the spoken dialect; there would be clear proof if the Apabhra&ndota;ça verses of the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi> could safely be ascribed to K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa. The M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr; unquestionably owes its vogue to the outburst of lyric in that dialect, which has left its traces in the anthology of H&amacr;la and later texts, and which about the period of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa invaded the epic.<note n=2 id=n166.2>Cf. Pravarasena&apos;s <hi>Setubandha</hi>. On H&amacr;la and K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, cf. Weber&apos;s ed., p. xxiv.</note>

<p>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s Sanskrit is classical; here and there deviations from the norm are found, but in most instances the expressions are capable of defence on some rule or other, while in others we may remember the fact of the epic tradition which is strong in Bh&amacr;sa.

<p>The metres of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa show in the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi> a restricted variety; the &Amacr;ry&amacr; (35) and the Çloka (17) are the only metres often occurring. In the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi> the &Amacr;ry&amacr; (29) and the Çloka (30) are almost in equal favour, while the <corr sic="Vasantatilak&amacr;">Vasantatilaka</corr> (12) and the Ç&amacr;rd&umacr;lavikr&imacr;&ddotb;ita (11) make a distinct advance in importance. In the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> the &Amacr;ry&amacr; (38) and Çloka (36) preserve their relative positions, while the Vasantatilaka (30) and Ç&amacr;rd&umacr;lavikr&imacr;&ddotb;ita (22) advance in frequency of use, a striking proof of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s growing power of using elaborate metrical forms. The Upaj&amacr;ti types increase to 16. The other metres used in the drama are none of frequent occurrence; common to all the dramas are Aparavaktra,<note n=3 id=n166.3>&#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &mdash; &#x23D1; &mdash; &#x23D1; &mdash; | &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &mdash; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &mdash; &#x23D1; &mdash; &#x23D1; &mdash; <hi>bis</hi>.</note> Aupacchandasika,<note n=4 id=n166.4>16 + 18 <hi>bis</hi>: normal type &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &mdash; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &mdash; &#x23D1; &mdash; &#x23D1; &mdash; &mdash; | &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &mdash; &mdash; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &mdash; &#x23D1; &mdash; &#x23D1; &mdash; &mdash;.</note> and Vait&amacr;l&imacr;ya, Drutavilambita, Pu&sdotb;pit&amacr;gr&amacr;, P&rdotb;thv&imacr;, Mand&amacr;kr&amacr;nt&amacr;, M&amacr;lin&imacr;, Va&ndota;çasth&amacr;, Ç&amacr;rd&umacr;lavikr&imacr;&ddotb;ita, Çikhari&ndotb;&imacr;, and Hari&ndotb;&imacr;; the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi> <pb n=167 id=pb167 facs="f:167">and the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> share also Prahar&sdotb;i&ndotb;&imacr;, Rucir&amacr;,<note n=1 id=n167.1>&#x23D1; &mdash; &#x23D1; &mdash;, &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &mdash; &#x23D1; &mdash; &#x23D1; &mdash;.</note> Ç&amacr;lin&imacr;, and Sragdhar&amacr;; the latter adds the Rathoddhat&amacr;,<note n=2 id=n167.2>&mdash; &#x23D1; &mdash; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &mdash; &#x23D1; &mdash; &#x23D1; &mdash;.</note> the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi> a Mañjubh&amacr;&sdotb;i&ndotb;&imacr;.<note n=3 id=n167.3>&#x23D1; &#x23D1; &mdash; &#x23D1; &mdash;, &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &mdash; &#x23D1; &mdash; &mdash; &#x23D1; &mdash;.</note> The earliest play has one irregular Pr&amacr;krit verse, the second two &Amacr;ry&amacr;s, and 29 of varied form of the types measured by feet or morae, and the last seven &Amacr;ry&amacr;s and two Vait&amacr;l&imacr;yas. The predominance of the &Amacr;ry&amacr; is interesting, for it is essentially a Pr&amacr;krit metre, whence it seems to have secured admission into Sanskrit verse.

<p>Not unnaturally, efforts<note n=4 id=n167.4>Huth, <hi>op. cit.</hi>, Table.</note> have been made on the score of metre to ascertain the dates of the plays <hi lang=la>inter se</hi>, and in relation to the rest of the acknowledged work of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa. The result achieved by Dr. Huth would place the works in the order <hi>Raghuva&ndota;ça</hi>, <hi>Meghad&umacr;ta</hi>, <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi>, <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, <hi>Kum&amacr;rasambhava</hi>, and <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>. But the criteria are quite inadequate; the <hi>Meghad&umacr;ta</hi> has but one metre, the Mand&amacr;kr&amacr;nt&amacr;, which occurs so seldom in the other poems and plays that any comparison is impossible,<note n=5 id=n167.5>Hillebrandt (<hi>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa</hi>, p. 157) points out the complexity of the position.</note> and the points relied upon by Dr. Huth are of minimal importance; they assume such doctrines as that the poem which contains the fewest abnormal caesuras is the more metrically perfect and therefore the later, while the poem which has the largest number of abnormal forms of the Çloka metre is artistically the more perfect and so later. A detailed investigation of the different forms of abnormal caesuras reveals the most perplexing counter-indications of relative date, and the essential impression produced by the investigations is that K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa was a finished metrist, who did not seriously alter his metrical forms at any period of his career as revealed in his poems, and that there is no possibility of deducing any satisfactory conclusions from metrical evidence. The fact that the evidence would place the mature and meditative <hi>Raghuva&ndota;ça</hi>,<note n=6 id=n167.6>H. A. Shah (<hi>Kau&tdotb;ilya and K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa</hi> (1920), p. 5), argues that <hi>Raghuva&ndota;ça</hi>, ix. 53<corr>,</corr> shows a more advanced view of hunting as a useful sport when regulated (<hi>Arthaç&amacr;stra</hi>, p. 329) than the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>. But the dramatic propriety of the passage of the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> renders the contention uncertain. Whether K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa knew precisely our <hi>Arthaç&amacr;stra</hi> is also uncertain.</note> which bears within it unmistakable proofs of the author&apos;s old age, before the <hi>Meghad&umacr;ta</hi> and long before the <hi>Kum&amacr;rasambhava</hi>, both redolent of love and youth, is sufficient to establish its total untrustworthiness.









<pb n=168 id=pb168 facs="f:168">
<div1 id=ch7 n=VII>
<head type=label>VII</head>

<head>CANDRA, HAR&Sdotb;A, AND MAHENDRAVIKRAMAVARMAN</head>


<div2 id=ch7.1 n=1>
<head><ab type=divNum>1.</ab> <hi>Candra or Candraka</hi></head>

<p>Some mystery exists as to the identity and character of Candra as a dramatist.<note n=1 id=n168.1>Lévi, BEFEO. iii. 38 f.; Liebich, <hi lang=de>Das Datum des Candragomin und Kalidasas</hi>; Konow, ID. pp. 72 f.; GIL. iii. 185, 399 f.</note> We have in a Tibetan version a <hi>Lok&amacr;nanda</hi>, a Buddhist drama telling of a certain Ma&ndotb;ic&umacr;&ddotb;a, who handed over his wife and children to a Brahmin as a sign of supreme generosity, which is ascribed to Candragomin, the grammarian, in whose <hi>Çi&sdotb;yalekh&amacr;</hi> is found a verse ascribed to Candragopin in the <hi>Subh&amacr;&sdotb;it&amacr;vali</hi>. If this is the dramatist Candaka or Candraka, who is placed by Kalha&ndotb;a under Tuñjina of Kashmir, and who rivalled the author of the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;rata</hi> in a drama, is wholly uncertain. The grammarian must have lived before <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 650, as he is cited in the <hi>K&amacr;çik&amacr; V&rdotb;tti</hi> though not by name; a more precise date it is impossible to give, for his reference to a victory of a Jarta over the H&umacr;&ndotb;as cannot be made precise until we know what J&amacr;&tdotb; prince is referred to, though Yaçodharman has been suggested. The identification by Lévi of Candra with a person of that name mentioned by I-Tsing as living in his time is seemingly impossible, though I-Tsing ascribes to him the verse found in the <hi>Çi&sdotb;yalekh&amacr;</hi> mentioned above; the verse is lacking in the Tibetan version and I-Tsing may have made a slip. His contemporary seems to have been a Candrad&amacr;sa, and to have dramatized the Viçvantara legend.

<p>To Candaka is ascribed in the <hi>Subh&amacr;&sdotb;it&amacr;vali</hi><note n=2 id=n168.2>v. 2275.</note> a fine verse of martial tone:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>e&sdotb;&amacr; hi ra&ndotb;agatasya d&rdotb;&ddotb;h&amacr; pratijñ&amacr;: drak&sdotb;yanti yan na ripavo jaghana&mdota; hay&amacr;n&amacr;m</hi>
    <l><hi>yuddhe&sdotb;u bh&amacr;gyacapale&sdotb;u na me pratijñ&amacr;: daiva&mdota; yad icchati jaya&mdota; ca par&amacr;jaya&mdota; ca.</hi>
</lg>

<pb n=169 id=pb169 facs="f:169"><p rend=noindent>&lsquo;I go to battle, and I swear that my foes shall never see the backs of my steeds; for the rest, fate directs the destiny of the wavering fight; I promise nothing, but shall take defeat or victory as it pleases destiny.&rsquo; A verse of love is:<note n=1 id=n169.1>v. 1629.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>pras&amacr;de vartasva praka&tdotb;aya muda&mdota; sa&mdota;tyaja ru&sdotb;am</hi>
    <l><hi>priye çu&sdotb;yanty a&nmacr;g&amacr;ny am&rdotb;tam iva te siñcatu vaca&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>nidh&amacr;na&mdota; saukhy&amacr;n&amacr;&mdota; k&sdotb;a&ndotb;am abhimukha&mdota; sth&amacr;paya mukham</hi>
    <l><hi>na mugdhe pratyetum bhavati gata&hdotb; k&amacr;lahari&ndotb;a&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Be gentle; show a little joy; lay aside thy anger; beloved, my limbs are dried up, let thy speech pour ambrosia upon them. Turn to me for a moment thy face, the abode of happiness; foolish one, time is an antelope which, gone, cannot be recalled.&rsquo; The other citations we have show skill both in tragic and erotic sentiment.

<p>Candraka was evidently admired by the authorities on poetics; we find in the commentary on the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi><note n=2 id=n169.2>p. 163; <hi>Subh&amacr;&sdotb;it&amacr;vali</hi>, 1916; <hi>Ç&amacr;r&nmacr;gadhara</hi>, cxvii. 14; text uncertain.</note> a verse, elsewhere ascribed to him, cited as an example where diverse sentiments blend but where one, that of coming parting of lovers, is predominant:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>eken&amacr;k&sdotb;&ndotb;&amacr; paritataru&sdotb;&amacr; v&imacr;k&sdotb;ate vyomasa&mdota;stham</hi>
    <l><hi>bh&amacr;nor bimba&mdota; sajalaluliten&amacr;pare&ndotb;&amacr;tmak&amacr;ntam</hi>
    <l><hi>ahnaç chede dayitavirah&amacr;ça&nmacr;kin&imacr; cakrav&amacr;k&imacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>dvau sa&mdota;k&imacr;r&ndotb;au racayati rasau nartak&imacr;va pragalbh&amacr;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;With one angry eye she gazes on the orb of the sun as it tarries on the horizon; with the other, dimmed by her tears, she looks on her soul&apos;s beloved; thus the mate of the Cakrav&amacr;ka, feeling the approach at nightfall of separation from her dear one, expresses two emotions, even as a clever actress.&rsquo;

<p>Curiously enough we have no less than four stanzas of benediction ascribed to him, which illustrate a formal feature of the Sanskrit drama, the introduction of each play with one or more stanzas involving divine favour. The verses are interesting, not so much for the intrinsic merits of their poetry, which frankly are not great, but because of the curious manner in which Indian poetry treats its deities; the greatest of gods nevertheless in his sportive moods is yet made the prototype of the human lover:<note n=3 id=n169.3><hi>Subh&amacr;&sdotb;it&amacr;vali</hi>, 66.</note>

<pb n=170 id=pb170 facs="f:170"><lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>cyut&amacr;m indor lekh&amacr;&mdota; ratikalahabhagna&mdota; ca valayam</hi>
    <l><hi>çanair ek&imacr;k&rdotb;tya hasitamukh&imacr; çailatanay&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>avocad yam paçyety avatu sa çiva&hdotb; s&amacr; ca girij&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>sa ca kr&imacr;&ddotb;&amacr;candro daçanakira&ndotb;ap&umacr;ritatanu&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Smiling, the daughter of the mountain wrought into one a digit fallen from the moon and a bracelet broken in a love quarrel, and said to her lord, &ldquo;Behold my work&rdquo;. May he, Çiva, protect you, and the lady of the mountain, and that moon of dalliance all covered with bites and rays.&rsquo;

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>m&amacr;tar j&imacr;va kim etad añjalipu&tdotb;e t&amacr;tena gop&amacr;yyate</hi>
    <l><hi>vatsa sv&amacr;du phalam prayacchati na me gatv&amacr; g&rdotb;h&amacr;&ndotb;a svayam</hi>
    <l><hi>m&amacr;traivam prahite guhe vigha&tdotb;ayaty &amacr;k&rdotb;&sdotb;ya sa&mdota;dhy&amacr;ñjalim</hi>
    <l><hi>çambhor bhinnasam&amacr;dhir uddharabhaso h&amacr;sodg&amacr;ma&hdotb; p&amacr;tu va&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;O mother.&mdash;My life.&mdash;What is it that my father guards so carefully in the palm of his hand?&mdash;Dear one, it is a sweet fruit.&mdash;He will not give me it.&mdash;Go thyself and take it.&mdash;Thus urged by his mother, Guha seizes the closed hands of his sire as he adores the Twilight and drags them apart; Çiva, angry at the interruption of his devotion, stays his wrath at sight of his son and laughs: may that laughter protect you.&rsquo;<note n=1 id=n170.1><hi>Subh&amacr;&sdotb;it&amacr;vali</hi>, 69.</note>


<div2 id=ch7.2 n=2>
<head><ab type=divNum>2.</ab> <hi>The Authorship of the Dramas ascribed to Har&sdotb;a</hi></head>

<p>Three dramas, as well as some minor poetry, have come down to us under the name of Har&sdotb;a, unquestionably the king of Sth&amacr;&ndotb;v&imacr;çvara and Kanyakubja, who reigned from about <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 606 to 648,<note n=2 id=n170.2>M. Ettinghausen, <hi>Har&sdotb;a Vardhana</hi>, Louvain, 1905; S. P. Pa&ndotb;&ddotb;it, <hi>Gaüdavaho</hi>, pp. cvii ff.; K. M. Panikkar, <hi>Sri Harsha of Kanauj</hi>, Bombay, 1922. It is impossible to connect the dramas with any definite incident of his reign such as the Pray&amacr;ga festival celebrated by Hiuan-Tsang.</note> the patron of B&amacr;&ndotb;a who celebrates him in the <hi>Har&sdotb;acarita</hi> and of the Chinese pilgrim Hiuan-Tsang who is our most valuable source of information on his reign. That the three plays are by one and the same hand is made certain in part by the common ascription in a verse in the prologue mentioning Har&sdotb;a as an accomplished poet, partly by the recurrence of two verses in the <hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi> and the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi> and of one in the former play and the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, and above all by the absolute similarity of style and tone in the three works, which renders any effort to <pb n=171 id=pb171 facs="f:171">dissociate them wholly impossible. The question of their actual authorship was raised in antiquity; for, while Mamma&tdotb;a in his <hi>K&amacr;vyaprak&amacr;ça</hi><note n=1 id=n171.1>i. 2. Cf. So&ddotb;hala (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 993) in <hi>K&amacr;vyam&imacr;m&amacr;&ndota;s&amacr;</hi> (GOS. i), p. xii.</note> merely refers to the gift of gold to B&amacr;&ndotb;a&mdash;or Dh&amacr;vaka in some manuscripts&mdash;by Har&sdotb;a, the commentators explain this of the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, which was passed off in Har&sdotb;a&apos;s name. This is, however, not in any way borne out by early tradition; I-Tsing<note n=2 id=n171.2>Trs. Takakusu, pp. 163 f.</note> clearly refers to the dramatization of the subject of the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi> by Har&sdotb;a and its performance, and in the <hi>Ku&tdotb;&tdotb;an&imacr;mata</hi><note n=3 id=n171.3>vv. 856 ff.</note> of D&amacr;modaragupta, who lived under Jay&amacr;p&imacr;&ddotb;a of Kashmir (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 779&ndash;813), a performance of the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, ascribed to a king, is mentioned. The ascription to B&amacr;&ndotb;a has nothing even plausible in it, so disparate are the styles of the dramas and the <hi>Har&sdotb;acarita</hi>, and we have the option of believing that Har&sdotb;a wrote them himself with such aid as his Pa&ndotb;&ddotb;its might give, or of accepting them as the work of some unknown dramatist, who allowed the king to claim the credit for them.


<div2 id=ch7.3 n=3>
<head><ab type=divNum>3.</ab> <hi>The Three Dramas</hi></head>

<p>The <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi> and the <hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi> are closely connected both in subject-matter and form; they are N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;s, each in four Acts; their common hero is Udayana, whom Bh&amacr;sa already celebrated, and the common theme one of his numerous amourettes. The <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>,<note n=4 id=n171.4>Ed. C. Cappeller, Böhtlingk, <hi lang=de>Sanskrit-Chrestomathie</hi>, 3rd ed., pp. 326 ff.; trs. Wilson, ii. 255 ff.; L. Fritze, Schloss Chemnitz, 1878. It was performed at a spring festival of K&amacr;ma.</note> in special, has found favour in the text-books of the drama, and has served to illustrate the technical rules.

<p>The ubiquitous Yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, insatiable in seeking his master&apos;s welfare, has planned marriage for him with the daughter of the king of Ceylon, but to attain this end has been difficult; to avoid vexing the queen V&amacr;savadatt&amacr;, he has kept her in the dark, and has spread a rumour which he has had conveyed by B&amacr;bhravya, the king&apos;s chamberlain, of the death of V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; in a fire at L&amacr;v&amacr;&ndotb;aka. The king of Ceylon then yields the hand of his daughter, and dispatches her in the care of the chamberlain and his minister Vasubh&umacr;ti to Vatsa, but, wrecked at sea, she is rescued by a merchant of Kauç&amacr;mb&imacr;, taken there, and handed <pb n=172 id=pb172 facs="f:172">over to V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; who, seeing her beauty, decides to keep her from contact with her inconstant spouse. But fate is adverse; at the spring festival which she celebrates with Vatsa, S&amacr;garik&amacr;, as the princess is called from her rescue from the sea, appears in the queen&apos;s train; hastily sent away, she lingers concealed, watches the ceremony of the worship of the god K&amacr;ma, thinking Vatsa is the god in bodily presence, but is undeceived by the eulogy of the herald announcing the advent of evening. In Act II S&amacr;garik&amacr; is presented with her friend Susa&mdota;gat&amacr;; she has depicted the prince on a canvas, and Susa&mdota;gat&amacr; in raillery adds her beside him; she admits her love, but the confidence is broken by the alarm created by the escape of a monkey from the stables. In its mad rush it breaks the cage in S&amacr;garik&amacr;&apos;s keeping, and the parrot escapes. The king and the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka enter the grove where the bird is, hear it repeat the maidens&apos; talk, and find the picture. The maidens returning for the picture overhear the confidences of the king and the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, until Susa&mdota;gat&amacr; sallies out and brings the lovers face to face. Their meeting is cut short by the advent of the queen, who sees the picture, realizes the position, and departs without manifesting the deep anger which she feels and which the king vainly seeks to assuage. In Act III the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka proves to have devised a scheme to secure a meeting of the lovers; S&amacr;garik&amacr; dressed as the queen and Susa&mdota;gat&amacr; as her attendant are to meet Vatsa, but the plot is overheard, and it is V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; herself who keeps the rendezvous; she listens to Vatsa&apos;s declarations of love, and then bitterly reproaches him, rejecting his attempts to excuse himself. S&amacr;garik&amacr;, who had come on the scene too late, hears the king&apos;s plight; weary, she ties a noose to her neck, when she is saved by the advent of the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka and the king, who naturally mistakes her for V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; whom he fears his cruelty has driven to suicide. He joyously recognizes his error, but the queen, who, ashamed of her anger, has returned to make friends with her husband, finds the lovers united, and in violent anger carries off the maiden and the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka captive. But in Act IV we find the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka released and forgiven, but S&amacr;garik&amacr; in some prison, the king helpless to aid her. Good news, however, arrives; the general Ruma&ndotb;vant has won a victory over the Kosalas and slain the king. A magician enters and is allowed to display his art, <pb n=173 id=pb173 facs="f:173">but the spectacle is interrupted by the advent of Vasubh&umacr;ti and B&amacr;bhravya, who also have escaped the shipwreck. They tell their tale of disaster, when another interruption occurs; the harem is on fire; V&amacr;savadatt&amacr;, shocked, reveals that S&amacr;garik&amacr; is there; Vatsa rushes to aid her, and emerges with her in chains, for the fire has been no more than a device of the magician. B&amacr;bhravya and Vasubh&umacr;ti recognize in S&amacr;garik&amacr; the princess, and Yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a arrives to confess his management of the whole plot and the magician&apos;s device. V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; gladly gives the king to Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;, since her husband will thus be lord of the earth, and Ratn&amacr;val&imacr; is her full cousin.

<p>The <hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi><note n=1 id=n173.1>Ed. R. V. Krishnamachariar, Srirangam, 1906; trs. G. Strehly, Paris, 1888.</note> introduces us in a speech by his chamberlain, Vinayavasu, to the king D&rdotb;&ddotb;havarman, whose daughter is destined for wedlock with Vatsa despite the demand for her hand made by the king of Kali&nmacr;ga, who revenges himself during Vatsa&apos;s imprisonment at the court of Pradyota by attacking and driving away D&rdotb;&ddotb;havarman. The maid is carried away by the chamberlain and is received and sheltered by Vindhyaketu, her father&apos;s ally, but he offends Vatsa, is attacked and killed by his general Vijayasena, who brings back as part of the booty the unlucky Priyadarçik&amacr;; the king allots her to the harem as attendant on V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; with the name &Amacr;ra&ndotb;yik&amacr; (&Amacr;ra&ndotb;yak&amacr;). In Act II we find the king, who has fallen in love with the maiden, seeking to distract himself with his Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka. &Amacr;ra&ndotb;yik&amacr; enters, to pluck lotuses, with her friend; she tells her love, which the king overhears; a bee attacks her when her friend leaves her, and in her confusion she runs into the arms of the king. Vatsa rescues her, but retires when her confidante returns. Act III tells that the aged confidante of the queen, S&amacr;&mdota;k&rdotb;ty&amacr;yan&imacr;, has composed a play on the marriage of Vatsa and V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; which the queen is to see performed; the rôle of queen is to be played by &Amacr;ra&ndotb;yik&amacr;, and Manoram&amacr; is to act the part of king, but she and the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka have arranged to let the king take the part. The performance causes anxiety to the queen, so ardent is the love-making, though S&amacr;&mdota;k&rdotb;ty&amacr;yan&imacr; reminds her it is but play-making; she leaves the hall, and finds the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka asleep; rudely wakened, he lets out the secret and the queen refuses to listen to <corr sic="Vatsas&apos;s">Vatsa&apos;s</corr> lame excuses. Act IV reveals &Amacr;ra&ndotb;yik&amacr; in <pb n=174 id=pb174 facs="f:174">prison, the king in despair, and the queen in sorrow, as she has learned from a letter from her mother that D&rdotb;&ddotb;havarman, her aunt&apos;s husband, is in bondage, needing Vatsa&apos;s aid. But Vijayasena brings news of the defeat of the Kali&nmacr;ga king and the re-establishment of D&rdotb;&ddotb;havarman, and the chamberlain of the latter brings his thanks, his one sorrow being his daughter&apos;s loss. Manoram&amacr; enters in terror; &Amacr;ra&ndotb;yik&amacr; has poisoned herself, V&amacr;savadatt&amacr;, filled with remorse, has her fetched, as Vatsa can cure her; the chamberlain recognizes his princess, Vatsa&apos;s magic arts bring her back to consciousness, and V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; recognizes in her her cousin, and grants her hand to the king.

<p>The <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi><note n=1 id=n174.1>Ed. Calcutta, 1886; TSS. 1917; trs. P. Boyd, London, 1872; A. Bergaigne, Paris, 1879; E. Teza, Milan, 1904.</note> performed at a festival of Indra, perhaps in the autumn, differs from these dramas in its form, for it is a N&amacr;&tdotb;aka in five Acts, and in its inspiration; those are variants by Har&sdotb;a on the theme of Vatsa&apos;s loves, this is the dramatization of a Buddhist legend, the self-sacrifice of J&imacr;m&umacr;tav&amacr;hana, which was told in the <hi>B&rdotb;hatkath&amacr;</hi>, whence it appears in the later versions of that text<note n=2 id=n174.2>KSS. xxii. 16&ndash;257; xc. 3&ndash;201; BKM. iv. 50&ndash;108; ix. 2. 776&ndash;930.</note> and in the <hi>Vet&amacr;lapañcavi&ndota;çati</hi>.<note n=3 id=n174.3>xv.</note> J&imacr;m&umacr;tav&amacr;hana is a prince of the Vidy&amacr;dharas, who <corr sic=hasinduced>has induced</corr> his father to resign his kingship, and give himself up to a life of calm; he has made the acquaintance of Mitr&amacr;vasu, the prince of the Siddhas, who has a sister. She has had a dream in which Gaur&imacr; has revealed to her her future husband, and J&imacr;m&umacr;tav&amacr;hana hidden behind a thicket overhears her confiding this dream to her friend; the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka forces a meeting on the timid lovers, who shyly confess their affection, when an ascetic from the hermitage arrives to take the maiden away. In Act II Malayavat&imacr; is love-sick, resting on a stone seat in the garden; a sound makes her move away, when the king enters, equally oppressed, declares his love and paints his fancy. Mitr&amacr;vasu comes to offer him his sister&apos;s hand; the king declines it, ignorant of whom he loves; she deems herself disdained and seeks to hang herself, but her friends rescue her and call for aid. J&imacr;m&umacr;tav&amacr;hana appears, and proves that she is his love by showing the picture. The two exchange vows, and the marriage is concluded. In Act III, after a comic interlude, we find them walking in the park in happiness; J&imacr;m&umacr;tav&amacr;hana is <pb n=175 id=pb175 facs="f:175">apprised of the seizure of his kingdom, but accepts the news gladly. But the last two Acts change the topic. While strolling with Mitr&amacr;vasu one day, J&imacr;m&umacr;tav&amacr;hana sees a heap of bones and learns that they are the bones of serpents daily offered to the divine bird Garu&ddotb;a; he resolves to save the lives of the serpents at the cost of his own, gets rid of Mitr&amacr;vasu, and goes to the place of offering. He hears the sobs of the mother of Ça&nmacr;khac&umacr;&ddotb;a, whose son is about to be offered, consoles her by offering himself in ransom, but is refused with admiration for his gallantry. But, when the two have entered the temple to pray before the offering, he gives himself to Garu&ddotb;a as substitute and is borne away. The last Act opens with the anxiety of the parents of J&imacr;m&umacr;tav&amacr;hana, to whom and his wife is borne a jewel fallen from his crown; Ça&nmacr;khac&umacr;&ddotb;a, also, emerged from the temple, finds the sacrifice made and reveals to Garu&ddotb;a his crime. It is too late; the hero expires as his parents arrive. Garu&ddotb;a is ashamed, and Gaur&imacr; appears to cut the knot, revive the prince, and re-establish him in his realm, in order to keep faith with Malayavat&imacr;; by a shower of ambrosia the snakes slain by Garu&ddotb;a revive, and he promises to forego his cruel revenge.


<div2 id=ch7.4 n=4>
<head><ab type=divNum>4.</ab> <hi>Har&sdotb;a&apos;s Art and Style</hi></head>

<p>Comparison with K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa is doubtless the cause why Har&sdotb;a has tended to receive less praise than is due to his dramas. The originality of his N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;s is not perhaps great, but he has effectively devised the plot in both; the action moves smoothly and in either play there is ingenuity. The scene of the magician&apos;s activity in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi> is depicted with humour and vivacity; the parrot&apos;s escape and its chatter are sketched with piquancy, and the exchange of costumes in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi> is natural and effective. The double comedy in the <hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi> is a happy thought, the intrigue in Act IV is neatly conducted, so as to show us V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; in the light of an affectionate niece, and the scene with the bee is attractive. It is true that the plays are full of reminiscences of the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi>, such as the escape in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi> of the monkey, and the monkey that there frightens the little princess while S&amacr;&mdota;k&rdotb;ty&amacr;yan&imacr; is Kauçik&imacr; revived. But in this artificial comedy elegance is sought, not <pb n=176 id=pb176 facs="f:176">originality,<note n=1 id=n176.1>Many traces of the <hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi> can be seen in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, especially in the characterization of the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka.</note> and Har&sdotb;a is a clever borrower. The similarity of development of both plays is perhaps more to be condemned; they are too obviously variations of one theme.

<p>The dominant emotion in either is love of the type which appertains to a noble and gay (<hi>dh&imacr;ralalita</hi>) hero, who is always courteous, whose loves, that is to say, mean very little to him, and who does not forget to assure the old love of his devotion while playing with the new. This is a different aspect of Vatsa&apos;s character from that displayed by Bh&amacr;sa, and admittedly a much inferior one. V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; suffers equal deterioration, for she is no longer the wife who sacrifices herself for her husband&apos;s good; she is rather a jealous, though noble and kind-hearted woman, whose love for her husband makes her resent too deeply his inconstancy. The heroines are <hi>ingénues</hi> with nothing but good looks and willingness to be loved by the king, whom they know, though he does not, to be destined by their fathers as their husband. In neither case is any adequate reason<note n=2 id=n176.2>&Amacr;ra&ndotb;yik&amacr; suggests that assertion would be undignified, seeing her actual condition. In the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi> a prophecy is made to do service as a motif.</note> suggested for the failure to declare themselves in their true character, unless we are to assume that they would not, in the absence of sponsors, have been believed. Susa&mdota;gat&amacr;, the friend of the heroine in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, is a pleasant, merry girl who makes excellent fun of her mistress. The Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka<note n=3 id=n176.3>Cf. Schuyler, JAOS. xx. 338 ff.</note> in both plays is typical in his greediness, but his figure lacks comic force; he is, however, a pleasant enough character, for his love for his master is genuine; he is prepared to die with him in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, though he thinks his action in rushing into the fire quixotic. The magician is an amusing and clever sketch of great pretensions allied to some juggling skill.

<p>The <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi> reveals Har&sdotb;a in a new light in the last two Acts. His liking for the marvellous is exhibited indeed in the last Acts of both the N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;s in accord with the theory, but it has a far wider scope in the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi>, where the supernatural freely appears, and, though the drama be Buddhist in inspiration, Gaur&imacr; is introduced to solve the difficulty of restoring <pb n=177 id=pb177 facs="f:177">J&imacr;m&umacr;tav&amacr;hana. Har&sdotb;a here rises to the task of depicting the emotions of self-sacrifice, charity, magnanimity, and resolution in the face of death; J&imacr;m&umacr;tav&amacr;hana, however bizarre his setting, is one of the ideals of Buddhism, a man seized with the conviction that to sacrifice oneself for others is the highest duty. Ça&nmacr;khac&umacr;&ddotb;a and his mother too appear as noble in character, far superior to the savage Garu&ddotb;a. There is, it must be admitted, a decided lack of harmony between the two distinct parts of the drama, but the total effect is far from unsuccessful. Perhaps as a counterpoise to the seriousness of the last part, Har&sdotb;a has introduced effective comedy in Act III. The Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, &Amacr;treya, is hideous and stupid; as he lies sleeping, covered by a mantle to protect him from the bees, the Vi&tdotb;a, Çekharaka, sees him, mistakes him for his inamorata, embraces him and fondles him. Navam&amacr;lik&amacr; enters, and, indignant, the Vi&tdotb;a makes the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, though a Brahmin, bow before her and drink alcohol. A little later Navam&amacr;lik&amacr; makes fun of him before the newly married couple by painting his face with Tam&umacr;la juice.

<p>Har&sdotb;a is fond of descriptions in the approved manner; the evening, midday, the park, the hermitage, the gardens, the fountain, the marriage festival, the hour for the bath, the mountain Malaya, the forest, the palace, are among the ordinary themes beloved in the K&amacr;vya. In imagination and grace he is certainly inferior to K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, but he possesses the great merit of simplicity of expression and thought; his Sanskrit is classical, and precise; his use of figures of speech and thought restrained and in good taste. There is fire in his description of a battle:<note n=1 id=n177.1><hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, iv. 6.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>astravyastaçirastraçastraka&sdotb;a&ndotb;ai&hdotb; k&rdotb;ttottam&amacr;&nmacr;ge muhur</hi>
    <l><hi>vy&umacr;&ddotb;h&amacr;s&rdotb;ksariti svanatprahara&ndotb;air gharmodvamadvahnini</hi>
    <l><hi>&amacr;h&umacr;y&amacr;jimukhe sa Kosal&amacr;dhipatir bhagne pradh&amacr;ne bale</hi>
    <l><hi>ekenaiva Ruma&ndotb;vat&amacr; çaraçatair mattadvipastho hata&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Heads were cleft by the blows of swords on helmets sore smitten; blood flowed in torrents, fire flashed from the ringing strokes; when his main host had been broken, Ruma&ndotb;vant challenged in the forefront of the battle the lord of Kosala, who rode on a maddened elephant, and alone slew him with a hundred arrows.&rsquo; The matching of the sound to the sense <pb n=178 id=pb178 facs="f:178">is admirable, while a delicate perception is evinced in the line describing the king&apos;s success in soothing the wounded queen:<note n=1 id=n178.1><hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, iv. 1.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>savy&amacr;jai&hdotb; çapathai&hdotb; priye&ndotb;a vacas&amacr; citt&amacr;nuv&rdotb;tty&amacr;dhikam</hi>
    <l><hi>vailak&sdotb;ye&ndotb;a pare&ndotb;a padapatanair v&amacr;kyai&hdotb; sakh&imacr;n&amacr;&mdota; muhu&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>praty&amacr;sattim up&amacr;gat&amacr; na hi tath&amacr; dev&imacr; rudaty&amacr; yath&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>prak&sdotb;&amacr;lyeva tayaiva b&amacr;&sdotb;pasalilai&hdotb; kopo &apos;pan&imacr;ta&hdotb; svayam.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;It was not so much by my false oaths of devotion, my loving words, my coaxing, my depths of dejection, and falling at her feet, or the advice of her friends, that the queen was appeased as that her anger was wiped away by the cleansing water of her own bitter tears.&rsquo; Pretty, if not appropriate, is the king&apos;s address to the fire:<note n=2 id=n178.2><hi>Ibid.</hi>, iv. 16.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>virama virama vahne muñca dh&umacr;m&amacr;nubandham: praka&tdotb;ayasi kim uccair arci&sdotb;&amacr;&mdota; cakrav&amacr;lam?</hi>
    <l><hi>virahahutabhuj&amacr;ha&mdota; yo na dagdha&hdotb; priy&amacr;y&amacr;&hdotb;: pralayadahanabh&amacr;s&amacr; tasya ki&mdota; tva&mdota; karo&sdotb;i?</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Stay, stay, fire; cease thy constant smoke; why dost thou raise aloft thy circle of flames? What canst thou avail against me, whom the fire of severance from my beloved, fierce as the flame that shall consume the universe, could not consume?&rsquo; There is excellent taste and propriety in Vatsa&apos;s address to the dead Kosala king:<note n=3 id=n178.3><hi>Ibid.</hi>, iv. 6/7. Cf. <hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi>, i. on Vindhyaketu&apos;s death.</note> <hi lang=sa-Latn>m&rdotb;tyur api te çl&amacr;ghyo yasya çatravo &apos;py eva&mdota; puru&sdotb;ak&amacr;ra&mdota; var&ndotb;ayanti.</hi> &lsquo;Even death for thee is glorious when even thy foes must thus depict thy manly prowess.&rsquo; Such a phrase may reveal to us the true Har&sdotb;a himself, the winner of many victories, and the hero of one great disaster.

<p>The <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi> strikes varied notes; there is fire and enthusiasm in the assurances which Mitr&amacr;vasu gives the prince of the swift overthrow of his enemy, Mata&nmacr;ga, at the hands of his faithful Siddhas, will he but give the word:<note n=4 id=n178.4>iii. 15.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>sa&mdota;sarpadbhi&hdotb; samant&amacr;t k&rdotb;tasakalaviyanm&amacr;rgay&amacr;nair vim&amacr;nai&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>kurv&amacr;&ndotb;&amacr;&hdotb; pr&amacr;v&rdotb;&sdotb;&imacr;va sthagitaraviruca&hdotb; çy&amacr;mat&amacr;&mdota; v&amacr;sarasya</hi>
    <l><hi>ete y&amacr;t&amacr;ç ca sadyas tava vacanam ita&hdotb; pr&amacr;pya yuddh&amacr;ya siddh&amacr;&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>siddha&mdota; codv&rdotb;ttaçatruk&sdotb;ayabhayavinamadr&amacr;jaka&mdota; te svar&amacr;jyam.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;With their chariots, meeting together and o&apos;erspreading the whole surface of the sky as they speed along, darkening the day <pb n=179 id=pb179 facs="f:179">as when the sun&apos;s rays are hidden in the rain, my Siddhas await but the bidding to fare forthwith hence to the battle; but say the word and thy haughty foe shall fall, and thy kingdom be restored to thee, while the princes bow before thee in fear of his fate.&rsquo;

<p>J&imacr;m&umacr;tav&amacr;hana, however, has other views of his duty:<note n=1 id=n179.1>iii. 17.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>svaçar&imacr;ram api par&amacr;rthe ya&hdotb; khalu dady&amacr;m ay&amacr;cita&hdotb; k&rdotb;pay&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>r&amacr;jyasya k&rdotb;te sa katham pr&amacr;&ndotb;ivadhakrauryam anumanye?</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Gladly, unasked, would I give my own life for another in compassion; how then could I consent to the cruel slaughter of men merely to win a realm?&rsquo; The saying is essential to the drama, for it leads immediately to the determination of the prince to sacrifice himself for the N&amacr;ga.

<p>There is dignity and force in the admonition addressed by the dying hero to the repentant Garu&ddotb;a who begs him to command him:<note n=2 id=n179.2>v. 25.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>nityam pr&amacr;&ndotb;&amacr;tip&amacr;t&amacr;t prativirama kuru pr&amacr;kk&rdotb;te c&amacr;nut&amacr;pam</hi>
    <l><hi>yatn&amacr;t pu&ndotb;yaprav&amacr;ha&mdota; samupacinu diçan sarvasattve&sdotb;v abh&imacr;tim</hi>
    <l><hi>magna&mdota; yen&amacr;tra naina&hdotb; phalati parimitapr&amacr;&ndotb;ihi&ndota;s&amacr;ttam etad</hi>
    <l><hi>durg&amacr;&ddotb;h&amacr;p&amacr;rav&amacr;rer lava&ndotb;apalam iva k&sdotb;iptam antar hradasya.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Cease for ever from taking life; repent of thy past misdeeds; eagerly accumulate a store of merit, freeing all creatures from fear of thee, so that, lost in the infinite stream of thy goodness, the sin of slaying creatures, in number limited, may cease to fructify, even as a morsel of salt cast in the unfathomable depths of a great lake.&rsquo;

<p>Though Buddhist the drama, the benediction is enough to show how effectively the spirit of the N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr; has been introduced into the legend:<note n=3 id=n179.3>i. 1.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>dhy&amacr;navy&amacr;jam upetya cintayasi k&amacr;m unm&imacr;lya cak&sdotb;u&hdotb; k&sdotb;a&ndotb;am?</hi>
    <l><hi>paçy&amacr;na&nmacr;gaçar&amacr;tura&mdota; janam ima&mdota; tr&amacr;t&amacr;pi no rak&sdotb;asi</hi>
    <l><hi>mithy&amacr;k&amacr;ru&ndotb;iko &apos;si nirgh&rdotb;&ndotb;ataras tvatta&hdotb; kuto &apos;nya&hdotb; pum&amacr;n?</hi>
    <l><hi>ser&sdotb;yam M&amacr;ravadh&umacr;bhir ity abhihito Buddho<note n=4 id=n179.4>Or <hi>bodhau</hi>, &lsquo;on his enlightenment.&rsquo;</note> jina&hdotb; p&amacr;tu va&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;&ldquo;Feigned is thy trance; of what fair one dost thou think? Open thine eyes for a moment and gaze on us whom love doth <pb n=180 id=pb180 facs="f:180">drive mad. Protector art thou; save thou us. False is thy compassion; could there be any man more pitiless than thou?&rdquo; May he, whom M&amacr;ra&apos;s beauties thus addressed, the Buddha, the conqueror, protect you.&rsquo;

<p>But Har&sdotb;a&apos;s chief merit is undoubtedly shown in erotic verses as in the description of the shyness of the new-made bride in the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi>:<note n=1 id=n180.1>iii. 4.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>d&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;&amacr; d&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;im adho dadh&amacr;ti kurute n&amacr;l&amacr;pam &amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;it&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>çayy&amacr;y&amacr;m pariv&rdotb;tya ti&sdotb;&tdotb;hati bal&amacr;d &amacr;li&nmacr;git&amacr; vepate</hi>
    <l><hi>niry&amacr;nt&imacr;&sdotb;u sakh&imacr;&sdotb;u v&amacr;sabhavan&amacr;n nirgantum evehate</hi>
    <l><hi>j&amacr;t&amacr; v&amacr;matayaiva me &apos;dya sutar&amacr;m pr&imacr;tyai navo&ddotb;h&amacr; priy&amacr;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Looked at, she casts down her face; addressed, she gives no reply; with head averted she lies on the couch; forcibly embraced, she trembles; when her maidens leave her chamber, she seeks also to depart; perverse though she be, my new-wed love delights me more and more.&rsquo; The accuracy of the aim of love as an archer is described in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>:<note n=2 id=n180.2>iii. 2.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>mana&hdotb; prak&rdotb;tyaiva cala&mdota; durlak&sdotb;ya&mdota; ca tath&amacr;pi me</hi>
    <l><hi>ana&nmacr;gena katha&mdota; viddha&mdota; sama&mdota; sarvaçil&imacr;mukh&amacr;i&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Mind is naturally mobile and hard to find; nevertheless mine has been pierced by love at once with all his darts.&rsquo; In entire harmony with Indian taste Har&sdotb;a dwells on the points of physical perfection in the adored one in the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi>:<note n=3 id=n180.3>iv. 7.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>khed&amacr;ya stanabh&amacr;ra e&sdotb;a kim u te madhyasya h&amacr;ro &apos;paras</hi>
    <l><hi>t&amacr;myaty &umacr;ruyuga&mdota; nitambabharata&hdotb; k&amacr;ñcy&amacr;nay&amacr; kim puna&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>çakti&hdotb; padayugasya noruyugala&mdota; vo&ddotb;hu&mdota; kuto n&umacr;purau</hi>
    <l><hi>sv&amacr;&nmacr;gair eva vibh&umacr;&sdotb;it&amacr;si vahasi kleç&amacr;ya ki&mdota; ma&ndotb;&ddotb;anam?</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;The burden of thy bosom serves to weary thy waist; why then add the weight of thy necklace? Thy thighs are wearied by the bearing of thy hips; why then thy girdle of bells? Thy feet can barely carry the load of thy thighs; why add thine anklets? When in every limb thou dost possess such grace, why dost thou wear ornaments to thy weariness?&rsquo; Har&sdotb;a is also capable of expressing a deeper side of love, as when the king in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi><note n=4 id=n180.4>iii. 15.</note> fancies that V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; has been driven to suicide by his faithlessness:

<pb n=181 id=pb181 facs="f:181"><lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>sam&amacr;r&umacr;&ddotb;hapr&imacr;ti&hdotb; pra&ndotb;ayabahum&amacr;n&amacr;d anudinam</hi>
    <l><hi>vyal&imacr;ka&mdota; v&imacr;k&sdotb;yeda&mdota; k&rdotb;tam ak&rdotb;tap&umacr;rva&mdota; khalu may&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>priy&amacr; muñcaty adya sphu&tdotb;am asahan&amacr; j&imacr;vitam asau</hi>
    <l><hi>prak&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;asya prem&ndotb;a&hdotb; skhalitam avi&sdotb;ahya&mdota; hi bhavati.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;My beloved, whose love for me waxed daily because of my affection and respect, has seen my falsity which she has never known before, and now assuredly she seeks to lay life aside in despair; for unendurable is a wrong against a noble love.&rsquo;


<div2 id=ch7.5 n=5>
<head><ab type=divNum>5.</ab> <hi>The Language and the Metres of Har&sdotb;a&apos;s Dramas</hi></head>

<p>Har&sdotb;a&apos;s Sanskrit is of the usual classical type, eschewing any deviation from the beaten paths, and his Pr&amacr;krits, mainly Çaurasen&imacr; with M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr; in the verses, offer nothing of special interest, beyond evidence of his careful study of Pr&amacr;krit grammar.<note n=1 id=n181.1>M&amacr;gadh&imacr; is found in the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi> spoken by the servant. On the variation of forms in the northern and southern editions see Barnett, JRAS. 1921, p. 589.</note>

<p>His use of metrical forms, on the other hand, marks the tendency to reject the simplicity of the earlier dramatists, and to insist on the use of the more elaborate metres, which in themselves are wholly undramatic, but give a much wider range of opportunity for the exhibition of merits of description. Har&sdotb;a&apos;s favourite is the Ç&amacr;rd&umacr;lavikr&imacr;&ddotb;ita, which occurs 23 times in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, 20 times in the <hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi>, and 30 times in the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi>; the Sragdhar&amacr; takes second place with 11, 8, and 17 occurrences. The Çloka occurs in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi> (9)<corr sic=","></corr> and the N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda (24), the frequency in the latter being due to the more epic character of the piece; its absence from the <hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi> is marked. The &Amacr;ry&amacr; occurs 9 times each in the N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;s, and 16 times in the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi>. The <hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi> suggests by its content immaturity, and its poverty in metres supports this view; it has but seven in all, including Indravajr&amacr;, Vasantatilaka (6), M&amacr;lin&imacr;, and Çikhari&ndotb;&imacr;. The <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi> has also Ç&amacr;lin&imacr; and Hari&ndotb;&imacr;, in common with the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, and Drutavilambita, while the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi> adds Pu&sdotb;pit&amacr;gr&amacr;, P&rdotb;thv&imacr;, and Prahar&sdotb;i&ndotb;&imacr;. That play has 5 Pr&amacr;krit &Amacr;ry&amacr;s and 1 G&imacr;ti, the other two 3 &Amacr;ry&amacr;s apiece, while the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi> contains a pretty pair of rhymed verses, each with P&amacr;das of 12 morae.



<pb n=182 id=pb182 facs="f:182">
<div2 id=ch7.6 n=6>
<head><ab type=divNum>6.</ab> <hi>Mahendravikramavarman</hi></head>

<p>Almost a contemporary to a day of Har&sdotb;a was Mahendravikramavarman, son of the Pallava king Si&ndota;havi&sdotb;&ndotb;uvarman, and himself a king with the styles of Avanibh&amacr;jana, Gu&ndotb;abhara, and Mattavil&amacr;sa, all alluded to in his play,<note n=1 id=n182.1>The <hi>Mattavil&amacr;sa</hi>, ed. TSS. lv. 1917.</note> who ruled in K&amacr;ñc&imacr;, the scene of his drama, in the first quarter of the seventh century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi><note n=2 id=n182.2>EI. iv. 152; <hi>South Ind. Inscr.</hi> i. 29 f.; G. Jouveau-Dubreuil, <hi>The Pallavas</hi>, pp. 37 ff.</note> Chance rather than any special merit has preserved for us his Prahasana,<note n=3 id=n182.3>A <hi>Sarvacarita</hi> is attributed to a B&amacr;&ndotb;a in R&amacr;jar&amacr;ma Çastrin&apos;s <hi>S&umacr;c&imacr;patra</hi>, but it may really be V&amacr;mana Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a B&amacr;&ndotb;a&apos;s as is the <hi>P&amacr;rvat&imacr;pari&ndotb;aya</hi> (against Ettinghausen, <hi>Har&sdotb;a Vardhana</hi>, pp. 122 f.). The <hi>Muku&tdotb;at&amacr;&ddotb;itaka</hi> of B&amacr;&ndotb;a is cited in Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;ap&amacr;la&apos;s comm. on the <hi>Nalacamp&umacr;</hi>, p. 227.</note> which is so far the only early farce published, and which has special interest as it comes from the south, and, as we have seen, shows signs of the same technique as that of Bh&amacr;sa. Thus the play is opened by the director at the close of the N&amacr;nd&imacr;, which is not preserved, and the prologue is styled Sth&amacr;pan&amacr;, and not, as usual, Prast&amacr;van&amacr;. We have also a reference to Karpa&tdotb;a as the writer of a text-book for thieves, as in the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi> of Bh&amacr;sa, but there is an essential difference in the fact that great care is taken in the prologue to set out at length the merits of the author as well as the name of the drama.

<p>The director introduces the play by a dialogue in which he by skilled flattery induces his first wife to aid him in the work, despite her annoyance at his taking to himself of a younger bride, and the transition to the actual drama is accomplished as in Bh&amacr;sa by his being interrupted in the midst of a verse by a cry from behind the scene, which leads him to complete his stanza by mentioning the appearance of the chief actor and his companion. They are a Çaiva mendicant of the skull-bearing order, a Kap&amacr;lin, and his damsel, Devasom&amacr; by name. Both are intoxicated, and the maiden asks for her companion&apos;s aid to prevent her from falling; he would hold her if he could, but his own condition hinders aid; in remorse he proposes to forswear strong drink, but the lady entreats him not for her sake thus to break <pb n=183 id=pb183 facs="f:183">his penance, and he joyfully abandons the rash project, praising instead his rule of life:<note n=1 id=n183.1>This verse is attributed to Bh&amacr;sa by Somadeva in his <hi>Yaçastilaka</hi>; Peterson, <hi>Reports</hi>, ii. 46.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>pey&amacr; sur&amacr; priyatam&amacr;mukham &imacr;k&sdotb;itavyam: gr&amacr;hya&hdotb; svabh&amacr;valalito &apos;vik&rdotb;taç ca ve&sdotb;a&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>yenedam &imacr;d&rdotb;çam ad&rdotb;çyata mok&sdotb;avartma: d&imacr;rghayur astu bhagav&amacr;n sa pin&amacr;kapa&ndotb;i&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Long live the god who bears the trident and who has revealed to men this as the way of salvation, to drink brandy, to gaze on the face of one&apos;s beloved, to wear beautiful and becoming raiment.&rsquo; He is reminded by his companions that the Arhants have a very different definition of the path of salvation, but he has little trouble in disposing of them:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>k&amacr;ryasya ni&hdotb;sa&mdota;çayam &amacr;tmaheto&hdotb;: sar&umacr;pat&amacr;&mdota; hetubhir abhyupetya</hi>
    <l><hi>du&hdotb;khasya k&amacr;rya&mdota; sukham &amacr;mananta&hdotb;: svenaiva v&amacr;kyena hat&amacr; var&amacr;k&amacr;&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;They establish that an effect, as self-caused, is of the same nature as its causes; when, therefore, they declare that pleasure is the effect of pain, the poor fools contradict their own dogmas.&rsquo; There follows a complimentary description of K&amacr;ñc&imacr;, and a careful parallel between the tavern where the pair are seeking more charity and a scene of sacrifice; the Kap&amacr;lin also discovers that Sur&amacr; has a celestial origin; it is none other than the form taken by the god of love when burnt by the flame from Çiva&apos;s eye, a conclusion heartily accepted by his friend. The two are successful in attaining alms, but the tragic discovery is made that the skull, which serves as begging bowl, and which seems indeed at first to be the <hi lang=fr>raison d&apos;être</hi> of the Kap&amacr;lin, is lost, though he consoles himself by reflecting that it was only a sign and that his occupation is still intact. A search through K&amacr;ñc&imacr; follows, and suspicion falls on a Buddhist monk, Ç&amacr;kyabhik&sdotb;u, who is lamenting the fact that despite the excellent fare he has received the law forbids the enjoyment of strong drink and women; he concludes that the true gospel of the Buddha contained no such ridiculous restrictions, and expresses his desire to benefit the whole community by discovering the authentic text. <pb n=184 id=pb184 facs="f:184">Naturally, when challenged, he denies that his begging bowl is that of the Kap&amacr;lin, and blesses the master for his good sense in insisting on shaving the head, since it prevents the damsel from succeeding in her well-meant effort to aid her companion by pulling his hair. His arguments as to the identity of his bowl are unconvincing to the Kap&amacr;lin:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>d&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;&amacr;ni vast&umacr;ni mah&imacr;samudra&mdash;: mah&imacr;dhar&amacr;d&imacr;ni mah&amacr;nti moh&amacr;t</hi>
    <l><hi>apahnuv&amacr;nasya suta&hdotb; katha&mdota; tvam: alpa&mdota; na nihnotum ala&mdota; kap&amacr;lam?</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Thou art the son of one who denies in his folly things that we see, the earth, the ocean, mountains and so forth; how then art thou not ready to deny so small a thing as a bowl?&rsquo; Moreover, when the Buddhist, politely and with commendable charity, picks up Devasom&amacr; when her fruitless assault on his locks lands her on the ground, he accuses him of taking her in marriage and invokes punishment on this violator of the rights of Brahmins. A P&amacr;çupata, a more respectable type of Çaiva sectarian, comes on the scene and is appealed to as an arbitrator, but finds the task too difficult; both claimants proudly assert their adherence to a creed which forbids lying, and the Buddhist recites in addition the whole list of moral rules which makes up the Çik&sdotb;&amacr;pada. The obvious arguments from colour and shape in favour of the Buddhist are made out by his rival to be no more than signs of his skill in changing objects at pleasure. Finally the P&amacr;çupata suggests that they must take the matter before a court. <hi>En route</hi>, however, a diversion is made by an Unmattaka, or madman, who has rescued the skull from a dog, the real thief; he first appears willing to give it as a present to the P&amacr;çupata, who haughtily rejects the horrible object, but suggests the Kap&amacr;lin as the recipient; then he changes his mind, but, annoyed by the cry of &lsquo;mad&rsquo;, asks the Kap&amacr;lin to hold the skull and to show him the madman; the Kap&amacr;lin, nothing loth, accepts the skull, and misdirects the madman. All are now happy; the Kap&amacr;lin makes a handsome apology to the Buddhist monk, and the usual Bharatav&amacr;kya with a reference to the ruling king, the author, concludes the work.

<p>The author undoubtedly shows a considerable knowledge of the tenets of the Buddhists, and the play is not unamusing, <pb n=185 id=pb185 facs="f:185">though the subject is much too trivial for the pains taken to deal with it. The style is certainly appropriate to the subject-matter; it is like that of Har&sdotb;a, simple and elegant, while many of the verses are not without force and beauty. In the prose speeches of the Kap&amacr;lin, however, we have occasional premonitions<note n=1 id=n185.1>pp. 7, 8, 9.</note> of the unwieldy compounds of Bhavabh&umacr;ti. There is, as in all the later Prahasanas, a certain incongruity between the triviality of the subject-matter and the elaboration of the form but the king has the merit of avoiding the gross vulgarity which marks normally the later works of this type.

<p>Short as is the play, it shows a variety of Pr&amacr;krits, for of the <hi lang=la>dramatis personae</hi> only the Kap&amacr;lin and the P&amacr;çupata speak Sanskrit, while the madman, the Buddhist, and Devasom&amacr; talk in Pr&amacr;krit. That of the Buddhist and of Devasom&amacr; is practically Çaurasen&imacr;, but the madman uses M&amacr;gadh&imacr;.<note n=2 id=n185.2>So the Unmattaka in the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> of Bh&amacr;sa.</note> The Pr&amacr;krits show some of the signs of antiquity which have been seen in Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s dramas; thus forms of the plural in <hi>&amacr;&ndotb;i</hi> and <hi>ññ</hi> in lieu of <hi>&ndotb;&ndotb;</hi> are found, doubtless as a result of the influence of Bh&amacr;sa. The frequency of such forms as <hi lang=sa-Latn>aho nu khalu</hi> and <hi lang=sa-Latn>ki&mdota; nu khalu</hi> is precisely in the manner of Bh&amacr;sa, and mention may be made of the employment of <hi lang=sa-Latn>m&amacr;</hi> with the infinitive in Pr&amacr;krit in a prohibition.

<p>The variety of metres is large in view of the brief extent of the play. There are nine different stanzas employed; five each of the Çloka and Ç&amacr;rd&umacr;lavikr&imacr;&ddotb;ita, three each of Indravajr&amacr; type and &Amacr;ry&amacr;, two each of Va&ndota;çasth&amacr; type and Vasantatilaka, the solitary Pr&amacr;krit verse being of the former kind, and one each of Rucir&amacr;, M&amacr;lin&imacr;, and Sragdhar&amacr;.<note n=3 id=n185.3>Antiquity is claimed by the editors of <hi>Caturbh&amacr;&ndotb;&imacr;</hi> (1922) for the Bh&amacr;&ndotb;as, <hi>Ubhay&amacr;bhis&amacr;rik&amacr;</hi> of Vararuci, <hi>Padmapr&amacr;bh&rdotb;taka</hi> of Ç&umacr;draka, <hi>Dh&umacr;rtavi&tdotb;asa&mdota;v&amacr;da</hi> of &Imacr;çvaradatta, <hi>P&amacr;dat&amacr;&ddotb;itaka</hi> of &Amacr;rya Çy&amacr;milaka, but no reliance can be placed on the first two ascriptions, and none of the plays need be older than 1000 <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> Their technique is similar to that of the <hi>Mattavil&amacr;sa</hi>.</note>







<pb n=186 id=pb186 facs="f:186">
<div1 id=ch8 n=VIII>
<head type=label>VIII</head>

<head>BHAVABH&Umacr;TI</head>


<div2 id=ch8.1 n=1>
<head><ab type=divNum>1.</ab> <hi>The Date of Bhavabh&umacr;ti</hi></head>

<p>Bhavabh&umacr;ti tells us in his prologues that he belonged to a family of Brahmins styled Udumbaras, of Padmapura, apparently in Vidarbha, who were of the K&amacr;çyapa Gotra and followed the Taittir&imacr;ya school of the Black Yajurveda. His full name was Çr&imacr;ka&ndotb;&tdotb;ha N&imacr;laka&ndotb;&tdotb;ha, son of N&imacr;laka&ndotb;&tdotb;ha and J&amacr;t&umacr;kar&ndotb;&imacr;, grandson of Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a Gop&amacr;la, fifth in descent from Mah&amacr;kavi, a V&amacr;japeya sacrificer, famed for his scholarship. He was skilled in grammar, rhetoric, and logic, or perhaps in grammar, logic, and M&imacr;m&amacr;&ndota;s&amacr;,<note n=1 id=n186.1><hi>P&amacr;dav&amacr;kyapram&amacr;&ndotb;ajña</hi>; see Belvalkar, HOS. XXI. xxxvi. ff. where the attempt to identify Padmapura with Padm&amacr;vat&imacr; as Pav&amacr;y&amacr; near Narv&amacr;r and the shrine of K&amacr;lapriya with K&amacr;lp on the Jumna is disproved. On his Vedic studies, see Keith, JRAS. 1914, pp. 729 f. He knew the <hi>K&amacr;mas&umacr;tra</hi>; JBRAS. xviii. 109 f.</note> if we may believe the legend that he was a pupil of Kum&amacr;rila preserved in one manuscript of the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>, which complicates the matter by styling the author also Umvek&amacr;c&amacr;rya, a commentator on Kum&amacr;rila&apos;s works. As he expressly mentions his knowledge of the Vedas, the Upani&sdotb;ads, S&amacr;&mdota;khya and Yoga, and gives Jñ&amacr;nanidhi as his teacher, we may probably discard this suggestion. The whole three of his plays were performed for the feast of the Lord K&amacr;lapriya, who is normally identified with Mah&amacr;k&amacr;la of Ujjayin&imacr;, though the scene of the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi> is laid in Padm&amacr;vat&imacr;. We may conjecture, therefore, that he left his home and proceeded to Ujjayin&imacr; or Padm&amacr;vat&imacr; in search of fortune. From the silence in his dramas on any good luck, it is strange to find that Kalha&ndotb;a in the <hi>R&amacr;jatara&nmacr;gi&ndotb;&imacr;</hi><note n=2 id=n186.2>iv. 144. On the dates, see Stein&apos;s Intr., § 85, and notes on iv. 126 and 134.</note> expressly asserted that he was a member of the entourage of Yaçovarman of Kanyakubja, who was defeated by Mukt&amacr;p&imacr;&ddotb;a Lalit&amacr;ditya of Kashmir, not earlier, probably, than <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 736. A further indication of date is afforded by the <pb n=187 id=pb187 facs="f:187">reference in V&amacr;kpati&apos;s <hi>Gaü&ddotb;avaha</hi><note n=1 id=n187.1>v. 799.</note> to Bhavabh&umacr;ti&apos;s ocean of poetry; the poem is a prelude to a description in Pr&amacr;krit of Yaçovarman&apos;s defeat of a Gau&ddotb;a king, and, as it seems never to have been finished, it presumably was interrupted by the king&apos;s own defeat. We must, therefore, place Bhavabh&umacr;ti somewhere about <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 700. The silence of B&amacr;&ndotb;a regarding him suggests that he was not known to him, while it is certain that he knew K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa; the first writer on poetics to cite him is V&amacr;mana.<note n=2 id=n187.2>i. 2. 12 (anonymous). That Bhavabh&umacr;ti knew Bh&amacr;sa may be assumed; his use of the rare Da&ndotb;&ddotb;aka metre may be borrowed, and similarities between <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi>, Act II and <hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi>, Act I, &amp;c., exist.</note> Verses not in our extant dramas are ascribed to him, so he may have written other works than the three dramas, two N&amacr;&tdotb;akas on the R&amacr;ma legend and a Prakara&ndotb;a, which we have. His friendship with actors is a trait to which he himself refers, and efforts have been made to trace in his works evidence of revision for stage purposes.


<div2 id=ch8.2 n=2>
<head><ab type=divNum>2.</ab> <hi>The Three Plays</hi></head>

<p>Perhaps the earliest of the works is the <hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi>, but the evidence for this is uncertain, and there is no reason to assign it definitely to an earlier date than the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>; both antedate, perhaps considerably, the <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi>. The <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>,<note n=3 id=n187.3>Ed. R. G. Bhandarkar, Bombay, 1876 (2nd ed., 1905); trs. Wilson, ii. 1 ff.; G. Strehly, Paris, 1885; L. Fritze, Leipzig, 1884. Cf. Gawro&nacute;ski, <hi lang=fr>Les sources de quelques drames indiens</hi>, pp. 43 ff.; <corr sic=Cimmini>Cimmino</corr>, <hi lang=it><corr sic=Osservacioni>Osservazioni</corr> sul rasa nel M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>, Naples, 1915.</note> as a Prakara&ndotb;a, should have a plot invented by the author, and this is true to the extent that the combination of elements which make up the intrigue is clearly the poet&apos;s, though the main motif of the story and the chief episodes can all be paralleled in the Kath&amacr; literature even as we have it.

<p>Bh&umacr;rivasu, minister of the king of Padm&amacr;vat&imacr;, has asked an old friend, now turned nun, K&amacr;mandak&imacr;, to arrange a marriage between his daughter, M&amacr;lat&imacr;, and M&amacr;dhava, son of an old friend Devar&amacr;ta, minister of the king of Vidarbha, who has sent his son to Padm&amacr;vat&imacr;, mainly in the hope that Bh&umacr;rivasu would remember a compact of their student days to marry their children to each other. The obstacle in the way is the desire of <pb n=188 id=pb188 facs="f:188">Nandana, the king&apos;s boon companion (<hi>narmasuh&rdotb;d</hi>), to wed M&amacr;lat&imacr; with the king&apos;s approval. K&amacr;mandak&imacr;, therefore, decides to arrange the meeting of the young people and their marriage, so as to be able to present the king with a <hi lang=fr>fait accompli</hi>. Both hero and heroine have friends, Makaranda and Madayantik&amacr;, sister of Nandana, and, after Acts I and II have made the main lovers sufficiently enamoured, in Act III, when the lovers are meeting in a temple of Çiva, Madayantik&amacr; is in danger of death from an escaped tiger, and is rescued by Makaranda, not without injury. These two then are deeply in love. But Act IV shows us the king resolved on the mating of M&amacr;lat&imacr; and Nandana; M&amacr;dhava, despairing of success through K&amacr;mandak&imacr;&apos;s aid alone, decides to win the favour of the ghouls of the cemetery by an offering of fresh flesh; this leads him in Act V to a great adventure, for on his ghastly errand he hears cries from a temple near by, and rushes in just in time to save M&amacr;lat&imacr; whom the priest Aghoragha&ndotb;&tdotb;a and his acolyte Kap&amacr;laku&ndotb;&ddotb;al&amacr; were about to offer in sacrifice to the goddess C&amacr;mu&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;. He slays Aghoragha&ndotb;&tdotb;a. In Act VI Kap&amacr;laku&ndotb;&ddotb;al&amacr; swears revenge, but for the moment all goes well; M&amacr;lat&imacr; is to wed Nandana, but by a clever stratagem Makaranda takes her place at the temple where she goes to worship before her marriage, and, while M&amacr;dhava and M&amacr;lat&imacr; flee, Makaranda is led home as a bride. In Act VII we hear how poor Nandana has been repulsed by his bride; Madayantik&amacr; comes to rebuke her sister-in-law, finds her lover, and elopes. But they are pursued, as they make their way to rejoin their friends, and in Act VIII we learn that the fugitives were succoured by M&amacr;dhava and so splendidly routed their foes that the king, learning of it, gladly forgives the runaways. But in the tumult M&amacr;lat&imacr; has been stolen away by Kap&amacr;laku&ndotb;&ddotb;al&amacr;, and Act IX is devoted to M&amacr;dhava&apos;s wild search with his friend to find her, which would have been fruitless, had not Saud&amacr;min&imacr;, a pupil of K&amacr;mandak&imacr;, by good fortune come on Kap&amacr;laku&ndotb;&ddotb;al&amacr; and rescued her victim. A scene of lament at the beginning of Act X is interrupted by the return of the lovers, and the king approves the marriage.

<p>The source of the <hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi><note n=1 id=n188.1>Ed. F. H. Trithen, London, 1848; NS. 1901; trs. J. Pickford, London, 1892.</note> is very different; it is an <pb n=189 id=pb189 facs="f:189">effort to describe the main story of the <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> by the use of dialogue narrating the main events, but a deliberate bid for dramatic effect is made through treating the whole story as the feud of R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, and his plots to ruin R&amacr;ma. The motif is introduced in Act I; at Viçv&amacr;mitra&apos;s hermitage R&amacr;ma and Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a see and love S&imacr;t&amacr; and &Umacr;rmil&amacr;, daughters of Janaka of Videha. R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, however, sends a messenger to demand S&imacr;t&amacr;&apos;s hand in marriage, but R&amacr;ma defeats the demon T&amacr;&ddotb;ak&amacr;, and Viçv&amacr;mitra gives him celestial weapons, and summons Çiva&apos;s bow, which, if he bends, he may have S&imacr;t&amacr;. The bow is broken and R&amacr;va&ndotb;a&apos;s envoy departs in rage. In Act II R&amacr;va&ndotb;a&apos;s minister M&amacr;lyavant plots with his sister Ç&umacr;rpa&ndotb;akh&amacr; how to make good the defeat sustained; a letter from Paraçur&amacr;ma suggests a means; they incite him to avenge the breaking of Çiva&apos;s bow. Paraçur&amacr;ma acts on the hint in his usual haughty pride; he arrives at Mithil&amacr;, insults R&amacr;ma and demands a conflict. In the next Act the exchange of insults continues; Vasi&sdotb;&tdotb;ha, Viçv&amacr;mitra, Çat&amacr;nanda, Janaka, and Daçaratha in vain seek to avoid a struggle between the youth and the savage Brahmin, slayer of his own mother and exterminator of K&sdotb;atriyas, but they fail. Act IV reveals that Paraçur&amacr;ma has been defeated, and has saluted with respect the victor; M&amacr;lyavant bethinks him of a new device, Ç&umacr;rpa&ndotb;akh&amacr; will assume the dress of Manthar&amacr;, servant of Kaikey&imacr;, Daçaratha&apos;s favourite wife, and destroy the concord of the royal family. That family is in excellent spirits; R&amacr;ma is at Mithil&amacr; with his father-in-law when the supposed Manthar&amacr; appears, bearing an alleged letter from Kaikey&imacr; asking him to secure Daçaratha&apos;s fulfilment of two boons he had once granted her; these are the selection of her son Bharata as crown prince and R&amacr;ma&apos;s banishment for fourteen years. Meanwhile Bharata and his uncle Yudh&amacr;jit have asked Daçaratha to crown R&amacr;ma forthwith; he is only too willing, but R&amacr;ma arrives, reports the demands of Kaikey&imacr; and insists on leaving for the forest, accompanied by S&imacr;t&amacr; and Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a, while Bharata is bidden remain, though he treats himself but as vicegerent. In Act V a dialogue between the aged vultures Ja&tdotb;&amacr;yu and Samp&amacr;ti informs us of R&amacr;ma&apos;s doings in the forest and destruction of demons; Samp&amacr;ti is uneasy and bids Ja&tdotb;&amacr;yu guard R&amacr;ma well. Ja&tdotb;&amacr;yu fares on his duty, sees S&imacr;t&amacr; stolen by R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, and is slain in her defence. <pb n=190 id=pb190 facs="f:190">We see R&amacr;ma and Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a in mourning; they wander in the forest, save, and receive tidings from, an ascetic; Vibh&imacr;&sdotb;a&ndotb;a, brother of R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, exiled from La&nmacr;k&amacr;, wishes to meet them at &Rdotb;&sdotb;yamukha where also are the jewels dropped by S&imacr;t&amacr; in her despair. V&amacr;lin, however, on the instigation of M&amacr;lyavant, seeks to forbid their entry; R&amacr;ma persists and slays his foe, who bids his brother Sugr&imacr;va lend his aid to R&amacr;ma&apos;s search. In Act VI M&amacr;lyavant appears desolated by the failure of his plans; he hears of Hanumant&apos;s setting La&nmacr;k&amacr; on fire. R&amacr;va&ndotb;a appears, doting on S&imacr;t&amacr;; in vain Mandodar&imacr; warns him of the advance of the enemy, but his disbelief is rudely dispelled; A&nmacr;gada bears terms of surrender of S&imacr;t&amacr; and humiliation before Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a; he refuses, and seeks to punish the envoy, who escapes. He then goes out to battle, described at length by Indra and Citraratha, who, as divine, can watch it from the sky; R&amacr;va&ndotb;a performs feats of valour, but Hanumant revives with ambrosia R&amacr;ma and his comrades, and R&amacr;va&ndotb;a finally falls dead beside his gallant son, Meghan&amacr;da. In Act VII the cities La&nmacr;k&amacr; and Alak&amacr;, represented by their deities, exchange condolences; it is reported that S&imacr;t&amacr; has by the fire ordeal proved her chastity. The whole of R&amacr;ma&apos;s party are now triumphant; an aerial journey carries them to the north, where they are welcomed by R&amacr;ma&apos;s brothers and Daçaratha&apos;s widows, and Viçv&amacr;mitra crowns R&amacr;ma.

<p>The <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi><note n=1 id=n190.1>Ed. and trs. S. K. Belvalkar, HOS. xxi&ndash;xxiii; trs. C. H. Tawney, Calcutta, 1874; P. d&apos;Alheim, Bois-le-Roi, 1906.</note> is based on the last and late book of the <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>. Janaka has departed; S&imacr;t&amacr; <hi>enceinte</hi> is sad and R&amacr;ma is consoling her. News is brought from Vasi&sdotb;&tdotb;ha; he bids the king meet every wish of his wife, but rank first of all his duty to his people. Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a reports that the painter, who has been depicting the scenes of their wanderings, has finished; they enter the gallery, and live over again their experiences, R&amacr;ma consoling S&imacr;t&amacr; for her cruel separation from her husband and friends; incidentally he prays the holy Ga&nmacr;g&amacr; to protect her and that the magic arms he has may pass spontaneously to his sons. S&imacr;t&amacr;, wearied, falls asleep. The Brahmin Durmukha, who has been sent to report on the feeling of the people, reveals that they doubt S&imacr;t&amacr;&apos;s purity. R&amacr;ma has already promised S&imacr;t&amacr; to let her visit again the forest, scene of her wanderings; he now decides <pb n=191 id=pb191 facs="f:191">that, when she has gone, she must not return, and the command is obeyed. Act II shows an ascetic &Amacr;trey&imacr; in converse with the spirit of the woods, V&amacr;sant&imacr;; we learn that R&amacr;ma is celebrating the horse sacrifice, and that V&amacr;lm&imacr;ki is bringing up two fine boys entrusted to him by a goddess. R&amacr;ma enters, sword in hand, to <corr sic=lay>slay</corr> an impious Ç&umacr;dra Çamb&umacr;ka; slain, the latter, purified by this death, appears in spirit form and leads his benefactor to Agastya&apos;s hermitage. In Act III two rivers Tamas&amacr; and Mural&amacr; converse; they tell us that S&imacr;t&amacr; abandoned would have killed herself but <corr sic="Ga&nmacr;ga">Ga&nmacr;g&amacr;</corr> preserved her, and entrusted her two sons, born in her sorrow, to V&amacr;lm&imacr;ki to train. Then S&imacr;t&amacr; in a spirit form appears, unseen by mortals; she is permitted by Ga&nmacr;g&amacr; to revisit under Tamas&amacr;&apos;s care the scenes of her youth. R&amacr;ma also appears. At the sight of the scene of their early love, both faint, but S&imacr;t&amacr;, recovering, touches unseen R&amacr;ma who recovers only to relapse and be revived again. Finally S&imacr;t&amacr; departs, leaving R&amacr;ma fainting.

<p>The scene changes in Act IV to the hermitage of Janaka, retired from kingly duties; Kauçaly&amacr;, R&amacr;ma&apos;s mother, meets him and both forget self in consoling each other. They are interrupted by the merry noises of the children of the hermitage; one especially is pre-eminent; questioned, he is Lava, who has a brother Kuça and who knows R&amacr;ma only from V&amacr;lm&imacr;ki&apos;s work. The horse from R&amacr;ma&apos;s sacrifice approaches, guarded by soldiers. Lava joins his companions, but, unlike them, he is undaunted by the royal claim of sovereignty and decides to oppose it. Act V passes in an exchange of martial taunts between him and Candraketu, who guards the horse for R&amacr;ma, though each admires the other. In Act VI a Vidy&amacr;dhara and his wife, flying in the air, describe the battle of the youthful heroes and the magic weapons they use. The arrival of R&amacr;ma interrupts the conflict. He admires Lava&apos;s bravery, which Candraketu extols; he questions him, but finds that the magic weapons came to him spontaneously. Kuça enters from Bharata&apos;s hermitage, whither he has carried V&amacr;lm&imacr;ki&apos;s poem to be dramatized. The father admires the two splendid youths, who are, though he knows it not, his own sons.

<p>In Act VII all take part in a supernatural spectacle devised by Bharata and played by the Apsarases. S&imacr;t&amacr;&apos;s fortunes after <pb n=192 id=pb192 facs="f:192">her abandonment are depicted; she weeps and casts herself in the Bh&amacr;g&imacr;rath&imacr;; she reappears, supported by P&rdotb;thiv&imacr;, the earth goddess, and Ga&nmacr;g&amacr;, each carrying a new-born infant. P&rdotb;thiv&imacr; declaims against the harshness of R&amacr;ma, Ga&nmacr;g&amacr; excuses his acts; both ask S&imacr;t&amacr; to care for the children until they are old enough to hand over to V&amacr;lm&imacr;ki, when she can act as she pleases. R&amacr;ma is carried away, he believes the scene real, now he intervenes in the dialogue, now he faints. Arundhat&imacr; suddenly appears with S&imacr;t&amacr;, who goes to her husband and brings him back to consciousness. The people acclaim the queen, and V&amacr;lm&imacr;ki presents to them R&amacr;ma&apos;s sons, Kuça and Lava.

<p>Indian tradition asserts that of the <hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi> Bhavabh&umacr;ti wrote only up to stanza 46 of Act V, the rest being completed by Subrahma&ndotb;ya Kavi; if this were to be taken as certain, it would be a sign that that drama was never completed, and so was the last work of the author, but the maturity of the <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi> makes it clear that, whatever there may be of truth in the story, the incompleteness cannot have been due to lack of time.


<div2 id=ch8.3 n=3>
<head><ab type=divNum>3.</ab> <hi>Bhavabh&umacr;ti&apos;s Dramatic Art and Style</hi></head>

<p>It is difficult to doubt that Bhavabh&umacr;ti must have been induced to write his Prakara&ndotb;a in an effort to vie with the author of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>. It is true that no such humour as lightens that drama is found in the <hi><corr sic="M&amacr;latim&amacr;dhava">M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</corr></hi>, but that was doubtless due to Bhavabh&umacr;ti&apos;s own temperament; conscious that he had no gift<note n=1 id=n192.1>The deplorable effort in Act IV of the <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi> at deliberate humour shows his weakness in this regard. A certain measure of irony of situation is all that he ever attains, e.g. in connexion with R&amacr;ma&apos;s ignorance of the identity of his sons, cf. <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi>, iv. 22/3; vi. 19/20.</note> in that direction, he omitted boldly the part of the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka which he could clearly not have handled effectively. But in doing so he lessened greatly his resources, and has to select for his theme in lieu of comic relief incidents of the terrible and horrible type blended with the supernatural. The main love-story, with the episode of the two young lovers, whose desires are thwarted by interposition of a powerful suitor, and whose affairs are mixed up with those of two other lovers, both affections ending in elopements, occurs in the <hi>Kath&amacr;sarits&amacr;gara</hi>,<note n=1 id=n193.1>xiii.</note> <pb n=193 id=pb193 facs="f:193">and in that collection as elsewhere<note n=2 id=n193.2>KSS. xviii.; xxv. (Açokadatta and the R&amacr;k&sdotb;asas): cxxi. (K&amacr;p&amacr;lika and Madanamañjar&imacr;); DKC. vii. (Mantragupta and Kanakalekh&amacr;).</note> we find the motifs of the sacrifice of a maiden by a magician and the offering of flesh to the demons to obtain their aid. But the credit is due to Bhavabh&umacr;ti of combining them in an effective enough whole, and of producing in Act V a spectacle at once horrible and exciting. He has also improved his authorities in detail; the escaped tiger replaces the more conventional elephant; and the intrigue is more effectually welded together by making Madayantik&amacr; the sister of Nandana, the king&apos;s favourite. Further, he has introduced the machinery of K&amacr;mandak&imacr; and her assistants Avalokit&amacr; and Saud&amacr;min&imacr;. This again is taken from the romance; Da&ndotb;&ddotb;in, as Brahmanical an author as Bhavabh&umacr;ti himself, adopts Buddhist nuns as go-betweens, and K&amacr;mandak&imacr;&apos;s offices are perfectly honourable; she merely undertakes, at the request of the parents, to subtract M&amacr;lat&imacr; from marriage with one unworthy of her and not her father&apos;s choice. The influence of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa explains Act IX, which is a manifest effort to rival Act IV of the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>, which it excels in tragic pathos, if it is inferior to it in grace and charm. The same Act has a flagrant imitation of the <hi>Meghad&umacr;ta</hi> in M&amacr;dhava&apos;s idea of sending a cloud message to his lost love, and is full of verbal reminiscences of that text.

<p>The plot, however interesting, is extremely badly knit together; the action is dependent to an absurd degree on accident; M&amacr;lat&imacr; twice on the verge of death is twice saved by mere chance. Moreover, the characters live apart from all contact with real life; they are in a city like the characters of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, but seem to exist in a world of their own in which the escape of tigers and the abduction of maidens with murderous intent cause no surprise. There is little individuality in hero or heroine, though the shy modesty of the latter contrasts with the boldness of Madayantik&amacr;, who flings herself at Makaranda&apos;s head. A friend of M&amacr;dhava, Kalaha&ndota;sa, is asserted later<note n=3 id=n193.3>Kum&amacr;rasv&amacr;min, <hi>Prat&amacr;parudr&imacr;ya</hi>, i. 38.</note> to be a Vi&tdotb;a, but has nothing characteristic, and probably the assertion is without ground.

<p>The <hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi> lacks the novelty of the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>, <pb n=194 id=pb194 facs="f:194">but Bhavabh&umacr;ti&apos;s effort to give some unity to the plot is commendable, though it is unsuccessful. The fatal error, of course, is the narration of events in long speeches in lieu of action. The conversations of M&amacr;lyavant and Ç&umacr;rpa&ndotb;akh&amacr;, of Ja&tdotb;&amacr;yu and Samp&amacr;ti, of Indra and Citraratha, and of Alak&amacr; and La&nmacr;k&amacr; are wholly undramatic; the word-painting of the places of their adventures, as seen from the aerial car on the return home, has not the slightest conceivable right to a place in drama. The elaborate exchange of passionate and grandiose defiances between R&amacr;ma and Paraçur&amacr;ma which drags through two Acts does credit to the rhetorical powers of the dramatist, but is wearisome and a mere hindrance to the action. On the other hand, the scene where Bharata determines to act as vicegerent and that between V&amacr;lin and Sugr&imacr;va are effective, while with excellent taste V&amacr;lin is made an enemy, who opposes R&amacr;ma under bad advice, and the treachery and fraternal strife of the <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> disappear for good. The characterization is feeble; R&amacr;ma and S&imacr;t&amacr; are tediously of one pattern without shadow on their virtue, and neither M&amacr;lyavant nor R&amacr;va&ndotb;a surpasses mediocrity.

<p>The <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi> reaches no higher level as a drama; he has a period of twelve years to cover, as he had fourteen in the <hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi>, and to produce effective unity would be hard for any author; Bhavabh&umacr;ti has made no serious effort to this end; he has contented himself with imagining a series of striking pictures. The first Act is admirably managed; the tragic irony of S&imacr;t&amacr;&apos;s gazing on the pictures of a sorrow over for good just on the verge of an even crueller fate, and of asking for a visit to see the old scenes of her unhappiness as well as her joy, which affords the king the means of immediately abandoning her, is perfectly brought out. Yet excuses are made for the king; it is the voice of duty that he hears; his counsellors who might have stayed his rash act are away. The scene in Act III, when S&imacr;t&amacr; sees and forgives her spouse, is admirable in its delicacy of the portrayal of her gradual but generous surrender to the proof that, though harsh, he deeply loved her. Lava again is a fine study in his pride, followed by submission to the great king when approached with courtesy, but the Vidy&amacr;dhara&apos;s tale of the use of the magic weapons, doubtless an effort to vie with Bh&amacr;ravi&apos;s <hi>Kir&amacr;t&amacr;rjun&imacr;ya</hi>, is ineffective. The last Act, however, reveals <pb n=195 id=pb195 facs="f:195">Bhavabh&umacr;ti at his best; the plain tale of the <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> makes Kuça and Lava recite the story of the <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> at a sacrifice and be recognized by their father; here a supernatural drama with goddesses as actors leads insensibly to a happy ending, for Bhavabh&umacr;ti again defies tradition to attain the end, without which the drama would be defective even in our eyes. S&imacr;t&amacr; and R&amacr;ma are splendidly characterized; the one in his greatness of power and nobility of spirit, the other ethereal and spiritual, removed from the gross things of earth. Janaka and Kauçaly&amacr; are effectively drawn; their condolences have the accent of sincerity, but the other characters&mdash;there are twenty-four in all&mdash;present nothing of note. It was not within Bhavabh&umacr;ti&apos;s narrow range to create figures on a generous scale; in his other dramas they are reduced to the minimum necessary for the action.

<p>As a poem the merits of the <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi> are patent and undeniable. The temper of Bhavabh&umacr;ti was akin to the grand and the inspiring in nature and life; the play blends the martial fervour of R&amacr;ma and his gallant son with the haunting pathos of the fate of the deserted queen, and the forests, the mountains, the rivers in the first three Acts afford abundant opportunity for his great ability in depicting the rugged as well as the tender elements of nature; what is awe-inspiring and magnificent in its grandeur has an attraction for Bhavabh&umacr;ti, which is not shown in the more limited love of nature in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa. He excels K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa also in the last Act, for the reunion of S&imacr;t&amacr; and R&amacr;ma has a depth of sentiment, not evoked by the tamer picture of the meeting of Du&hdotb;&sdotb;anta and Çakuntal&amacr;; both R&amacr;ma and S&imacr;t&amacr; are creatures of more vital life and deeper experience than the king and his woodland love.

<p>We find, in fact, in Bhavabh&umacr;ti, in a degree unknown to K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, child of fortune, to whom life appeared as an ordered joyous whole, the sense of the mystery of things; &lsquo;what brings things together&rsquo;, he says, &lsquo;is some mysterious inward tie; it is certainly not upon outward circumstances that affection rests&rsquo;.<note n=1 id=n195.1><hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi>, vi. 12.</note> Self-sacrifice is a reality to Bhavabh&umacr;ti; R&amacr;ma is prepared to abandon without a pang affection, compassion, and felicity, nay S&imacr;t&amacr; herself, for the sake of his people,<note n=2 id=n195.2><hi>Ibid.</hi>, i. 12.</note> and he acts up to his resolve. Friendship is to him sacred; to guard a friend&apos;s interests <pb n=196 id=pb196 facs="f:196">at the cost of one&apos;s own, to avoid in dealings with him all malice and guile, and to strive for his weal as if for one&apos;s own is the essential mark of true friendship.<note n=1 id=n196.1><hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi>, v. 59. Cf. <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi>, iv. 13, 14.</note> Admirable also is his conception of love, far nobler than that normal in Indian literature; it is the same in happiness and sorrow, adapted to every circumstance of life, in which the heart finds solace, unspoiled by age, mellowing and becoming more valuable as in course of time reserve dies away, a supreme blessing attained only by those that are fortunate and after long toil.<note n=2 id=n196.2><hi>Ibid.</hi>, i. 39.</note> The child completes the union; it ties in a common knot of union the strands of its parents&apos; hearts.<note n=3 id=n196.3><hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi>, iii. 18.</note> Bhavabh&umacr;ti was clearly a solitary soul; this is attested by the prologue of the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>ye n&amacr;ma kecid iha na&hdotb; prathayanty avajñ&amacr;m: j&amacr;nanti te kim api t&amacr;n prati nai&sdotb;a yatna&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>utpatsyate &apos;sti mama ko &apos;pi sam&amacr;nadharm&amacr;: k&amacr;lo hy ayam anavadhir vipul&amacr; ca p&rdotb;thv&imacr;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Those that disparage me know little; for them my effort is not made; there will or does exist some one with like nature to mine, for time is boundless and the earth is wide.&rsquo; Yet we may sympathize with those who felt<note n=4 id=n196.4>Cf. <hi>ibid.</hi>, i. 5.</note> that his art was unfit for the stage, for Bhavabh&umacr;ti&apos;s style has many demerits in addition to the defects of his technique.

<p>Bhavabh&umacr;ti in fact proclaims here as his own merit richness and elevation of expression (<hi>prau&ddotb;hatvam ud&amacr;rat&amacr; ca vacas&amacr;m</hi>) and depth of meaning, and we must admit that he has no small grounds for his claims. The depth of thought and grandeur which can be admitted in the case of Bhavabh&umacr;ti must be measured by Indian standards, and be understood subject to the grave limitations which are imposed on any Brahmanical speculation as to existence by the orthodoxy which is as apparent in Bhavabh&umacr;ti as it is in the lighter-hearted K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa. When, therefore, we are told<note n=5 id=n196.5>Ryder, <hi>The Little Clay Cart</hi>, p. xvi.</note> that &lsquo;with reference to K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa he holds a position such as Aeschylus holds with reference to Euripides&rsquo;, we must not take too seriously the comparison. No poet, in fact, suggests less readily comparison with Euripides than does K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa. He has nothing whatever of the questioning mind of the <pb n=197 id=pb197 facs="f:197">Greek dramatist, contemporary of the Sophists, and eager inquirer into the validity of all established conventions. In style again he aims at a level of perfection of achievement, which was neither sought nor attained by Euripides. Unquestionably, if any parallel were worth making, K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa would fall to be ranked as the Sophokles of the Indian drama, for as far as any Indian poet could, &lsquo;he saw life steadily and saw it whole&rsquo;, and was free from the vain questionings which vexed the soul of Euripides. Bhavabh&umacr;ti again cannot seriously be compared with Aischylos, for he accepted without question the Brahmanical conceptions of world order, unlike the great Athenian who sought to interpret for himself the fundamental facts of existence, and who found for them no solution in popular belief or traditional religion. There can, moreover, be no greater contrast in style than that between the simple strength of Aischylos, despite his power of brilliant imagery,<note n=1 id=n197.1>G. Norwood, <hi>Greek Tragedy</hi>, pp. 121 ff.</note> and the over-elaboration and exaggeration of Bhavabh&umacr;ti. The distinction between K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa and his successor is of a different kind. Both accepted the traditional order, but K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, enjoying, we may feel assured, a full measure of prosperity in the golden age of India under the Gupta empire, viewed with a determined optimism all that passed before him in life, in strange contrast to the bitterness of the denunciations of existence which Buddhism, then losing ground, has set forth as its contribution to the problems of life. Bhavabh&umacr;ti, on his part, recognized with a truer insight, sharpened perhaps by the obvious inferiority of his fortunes and failure to enjoy substantial royal favour, the difficulties and sorrows of life; his theme is not the joys of a pleasure-loving great king or the vicissitudes of a Pur&umacr;ravas, too distant from humanity to touch our own life, but the bitter woes of R&amacr;ma and S&imacr;t&amacr;, who have for us the reality of manhood and womanhood, as many a touch reminds us:<note n=2 id=n197.2>i. 27.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>kim api kim api mandam mandam asattiyog&amacr;d: avicalitakapola&mdota; jalpatoç ca krame&ndotb;a</hi>
    <l><hi>açithilaparirambhavy&amacr;p&rdotb;taikaikado&sdotb;&ndotb;or: aviditagatay&amacr;m&amacr; r&amacr;trir eva&mdota; vyara&ndota;s&imacr;t.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;As slowly and gently, cheek pressed against cheek, we whispered soft nothings, each clasping the other with warm embrace, the night, whose watches had sped unnoticed, came to an end.&rsquo;

<pb n=198 id=pb198 facs="f:198"><p>As regards the formal side of Bhavabh&umacr;ti&apos;s style we must unquestionably admit his power of expression, which is displayed equally in all three dramas. To modern taste Bhavabh&umacr;ti is most attractive when he is simple and natural, as he can be when it pleases him. Thus in Act VI of the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi> we have a pretty expression of M&amacr;dhava&apos;s joy at the words of love of him uttered by M&amacr;lat&imacr; when she has no idea of his presence near her:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>ml&amacr;nasya j&imacr;vakusumasya vik&amacr;san&amacr;ni: sa&mdota;tarpa&ndotb;&amacr;ni sakalendriyamohan&amacr;ni</hi>
    <l><hi>&amacr;nandan&amacr;ni h&rdotb;dayaikaras&amacr;yan&amacr;ni: di&sdotb;&tdotb;y&amacr; may&amacr;py adhigat&amacr;ni vacom&rdotb;t&amacr;ni.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Fortune has favoured me, for I have heard the nectar of her words that make to bloom again the faded flower of my life, delightful, disturbing every sense, causing gladness, sole elixir for my heart.&rsquo; The deliberate rhyming effect is as appropriate as it is uncommon in such elaboration, and it is characteristic that the same effect is shortly afterwards repeated. Effective simplicity and directness also characterize the speech, in Sanskrit contrary to the usual rule, of Buddharak&sdotb;it&amacr; in Act VII, when she clinches the argument in favour of the elopement of Madayantik&amacr; and Makaranda:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>prey&amacr;n manorathasahasrav&rdotb;ta&hdotb; sa e&sdotb;a&hdotb;: suptapramattajanam etad am&amacr;tyaveçma</hi>
    <l><hi>prau&ddotb;ha&mdota; tama&hdotb; kuru k&rdotb;tajñatayaiva bhadram: utk&sdotb;iptam&umacr;kama&ndotb;in&umacr;puram ehi y&amacr;ma&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Here is thy beloved, on whom a thousand times thy hopes have rested; in the minister&apos;s palace the men are asleep or drunken; impenetrable is the darkness; be grateful and show thy favour; come, let us silence our jewelled anklets by laying them aside, and depart hence.&rsquo; Equally effective is the expression of the admirable advice tendered to M&amacr;dhava and M&amacr;lat&imacr; at the moment when K&amacr;mandak&imacr; has succeeded in securing their union:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>preyo mitram bandhut&amacr; v&amacr; samagr&amacr;: sarve k&amacr;m&amacr;&hdotb; çevadhir j&imacr;vita&mdota; v&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>str&imacr;&ndotb;&amacr;m bhart&amacr; dharmad&amacr;r&amacr;ç ca pu&ndota;s&amacr;m: ity anyonya&mdota; vatsayor jñ&amacr;tam astu.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Know, my dear children, that to a wife her husband and to a husband his lawful wife are, each to each, the dearest of friends, the sum total of relationships, the completeness of desire, the <pb n=199 id=pb199 facs="f:199">perfection of treasures, even life itself.&rsquo; Pretty again are the terms in which K&amacr;mandak&imacr; laments M&amacr;lat&imacr; in Act X when she learns of her disappearance:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>&amacr; janmana&hdotb; pratimuh&umacr;rtaviçe&sdotb;aramy&amacr;&ndotb;y: &amacr;ce&sdotb;&tdotb;it&amacr;ni tava samprati t&amacr;ni t&amacr;ni</hi>
    <l><hi>c&amacr;&tdotb;&umacr;ni c&amacr;rumadhur&amacr;&ndotb;i ca sa&mdota;sm&rdotb;t&amacr;ni: deha&mdota; dahanti h&rdotb;daya&mdota; ca vid&amacr;rayanti.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;My body is aflame and my heart torn in sunder by the memory of thy childish movements which grew more delightful every hour from thy birth, and of the beauty and sweetness of thy loving words.&rsquo;

<p>It is, therefore, the more to be regretted that Bhavabh&umacr;ti was not content with simplicity, but is often too fond of elaborate and overloaded descriptions, which are fatally lacking in simplicity and intelligibility and can be fully comprehended only after careful study and examination. We must, however, it is clear, admit that Bhavabh&umacr;ti definitely improved in taste as the years went on. The latest of his dramas, the <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi>, is far less obnoxious to criticism for defects of judgement than the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>, which may be set down as an adventure in a genre unsuited to the poet&apos;s talent. There is an admirable touch in the scene in Act I of the play where S&imacr;t&amacr;, wearied, falls to rest on the pillow of R&amacr;ma&apos;s arm, that arm which no other woman can claim and which has ever lulled her to sleep, and he gazes on her in fond admiration:<note n=1 id=n199.1>i. 38.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>iya&mdota; gehe lak&sdotb;m&imacr;r iyam am&rdotb;tavartir nayanayor</hi>
    <l><hi>as&amacr;v asy&amacr;&hdotb; sparço vapu&sdotb;i bahulaç candanarasa&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>aya&mdota; ka&ndotb;&tdotb;he b&amacr;hu&hdotb; çiçiramas&rdotb;&ndotb;o mauktikasara&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>kim asy&amacr; na preyo yadi param asahyas tu viraha&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;She is Fortune herself in my home; she is a pencil of ambrosia for the eyes; her touch here on my body is as fragrant as sandal juice; her arm round my neck is cool and soft as a necklace of pearls; what in her is there that is not dear, save only the misery of separation from her?&rsquo; Scarcely are the words said than the attendant enters with the word, &lsquo;It has come&rsquo;, which on her lips is to announce the advent of the spy whose report is to lead to S&imacr;t&amacr;&apos;s banishment, while the audience, following the words, applies it at once to the separation which R&amacr;ma was deploring, <pb n=200 id=pb200 facs="f:200">and which to him was the parting in the past when R&amacr;va&ndotb;a stole his bride.

<p>The spontaneous regard which springs up for each other in the hearts of the two princes Lava and Candraketu when they meet is admirably depicted:<note n=1 id=n200.1>v. 16.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>yad&rdotb;cch&amacr;samp&amacr;ta&hdotb; kim u gu&ndotb;aga&ndotb;&amacr;n&amacr;m atiçaya&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>pur&amacr;&ndotb;o v&amacr; janm&amacr;ntaranibi&ddotb;abandha&hdotb; paricaya&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>nijo v&amacr; sambandha&hdotb; kim u vidhivaç&amacr;t ko &apos;py avidito</hi>
    <l><hi>mamaitasmin d&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;e h&rdotb;dayam avadh&amacr;na&mdota; racayati?</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Is it this chance encounter, or his wealth of splendid qualities, or an ancient love, firm bound in a former birth, or a common tie of blood unknown through the might of fate, which draws close my heart to him even at first sight?&rsquo;

<p>The rebuke which V&amacr;sant&imacr; addresses to R&amacr;ma for his treatment of S&imacr;t&amacr;, despite the loyalty of the queen, is effectively broken off by a faint:<note n=2 id=n200.2>iii. 27.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>tva&mdota; j&imacr;vita&mdota; tvam asi me h&rdotb;daya&mdota; dvit&imacr;yam</hi>
    <l><hi>tva&mdota; kaumud&imacr; nayanayor am&rdotb;ta&mdota; tvam a&nmacr;ge</hi>
    <l><hi>ity &amacr;dibhi&hdotb; priyaçatair anurudhya mugdh&amacr;m</hi>
    <l><hi>t&amacr;m eva ç&amacr;ntam athav&amacr; kim ata&hdotb; pare&ndotb;a.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;&ldquo;Thou art my life, my second heart, thou the moonlight of my eyes, the ambrosia for my body thou&rdquo;: with these and a hundred other endearments didst thou win her simple soul, and now alas&mdash;but what need to say more?&rsquo;

<p>Elsewhere we have less simplicity, but in these cases we must distinguish carefully between those instances in which the difficulty and complexity of expression serve to illustrate the thought, and those in which the words are made to stand in lieu of ideas. In many cases Bhavabh&umacr;ti may justly claim to have achieved substantial success, even when he is not precisely simple. The effect of love on M&amacr;dhava is effectively expressed:<note n=3 id=n200.3>i. 29.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>paricched&amacr;t&imacr;ta&hdotb; sakalavacan&amacr;n&amacr;m avi&sdotb;aya&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>punarjanmany asminn anubhavapatha&mdota; yo na gatav&amacr;n</hi>
    <l><hi>vivekapradhva&ndota;s&amacr;d upacitamah&amacr;mohagahano</hi>
    <l><hi>vik&amacr;ra&hdotb; ko &apos;py antar ja&ddotb;ayati ca t&amacr;pa&mdota; ca kurute.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;An emotion, evading determination, inexpressible by words, never before experienced in this birth of mine, wholly confusing <pb n=201 id=pb201 facs="f:201">because of the impossibility of examination, is at once numbing me within and filling me with a torment of fire.&rsquo;

<p>The poet&apos;s command of the philosophical conceptions of his day is shown in the verse following:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>paricchedavyaktir bhavati na pura&hdotb;sthe &apos;pi vi&sdotb;aye</hi>
    <l><hi>bhavaty abhyaste &apos;pi smara&ndotb;am atath&amacr;bh&amacr;vavirasam</hi>
    <l><hi>na sa&mdota;t&amacr;pacchedo himasarasi v&amacr; candramasi v&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>mano ni&sdotb;&tdotb;h&amacr;ç&umacr;nyam bhramati ca kim apy &amacr;likhati ca.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Though an object be before one&apos;s gaze, determination is not easy; brought back, memory intervenes to introduce an element of falsity; neither in the cool lake nor in the moonbeams can passion be quenched; my mind, powerless to attain a fixed result, wanders, and yet records something.&rsquo;

<p>We have a further effective picture of the physical effect of love on M&amacr;dhava when he seeks to assuage his sorrows by depicting his beloved from memory:<note n=1 id=n201.1>i. 34.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>v&amacr;ra&mdota; v&amacr;ra&mdota; tirayati d&rdotb;çor udgamam b&amacr;&sdotb;pap&umacr;ras</hi>
    <l><hi>tatsa&mdota;kalpopahitaja&ddotb;ima stambham abhyeti g&amacr;tram</hi>
    <l><hi>sadya&hdotb; svidyann ayam aviratotkampalol&amacr;&nmacr;gul&imacr;ka&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>p&amacr;&ndotb;ir lekh&amacr;vidhi&sdotb;u nitar&amacr;&mdota; vartate ki&mdota; karomi.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Time after time the tears that stream from my eyes blind my sight; my body is paralysed by the numbness born of the thought of her; when I seek to draw, my hand grows moist and trembles incessantly; ah, what is there that I can do?&rsquo;

<p>It is, however, easy to pass into exaggeration, as in:<note n=2 id=n201.2>v. 10.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>l&imacr;neva pratibimbiteva likhitevotk&imacr;r&ndotb;ar&umacr;peva ca</hi>
    <l><hi>pratyupteva ca vajralepagha&tdotb;itev&amacr;ntarnikh&amacr;teva ca</hi>
    <l><hi>s&amacr; naç cetasi k&imacr;liteva viçikhaiç cetobhuva&hdotb; pañcabhiç</hi>
    <l><hi>cint&amacr;sa&mdota;tatitantuj&amacr;lanibi&ddotb;asy&umacr;teva ca lagn&amacr; priy&amacr;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;So have I grasped my dear one that she is as it were merged in me, reflected in me, depicted in me, her form mingled in me, cast into me, cemented with adamant to me, planted within me, pinned to my soul by the five arrows of love, firmly sewn into the fabric of my thought <hi>continuum</hi>.&rsquo;

<p>A stanza like this, whatever credit it may do to the ingenuity of its author, hardly gives any high opinion of his literary taste, but we are undoubtedly forced to assume that he believed deliberately in the merits of the style he adopted, which as <pb n=202 id=pb202 facs="f:202">contrasted with that of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa belongs to the Gau&ddotb;&imacr; type,<note n=1 id=n202.1>V&amacr;mana, i. 2. 12; SD. 627; <hi>K&amacr;vy&amacr;darça</hi>, i. 40 ff.</note> which loves compounds in prose, and aims at the grandiose rather than sweetness and grace. The adoption of such a style, possibly under the influence of the reputation of B&amacr;&ndotb;a, is wholly unjustified in drama; the prose, which normally in the plays moves freely and easily, is hampered by compounds of ridiculous length which must have been nearly as unintelligible to his audiences as they are now without careful study. The defect, it is true, gradually diminishes; the <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi> is far freer from sins of this type. In the verse the theory does not make such demands for compounds, so that the poetry is often better than the prose; especially in his latest drama it gains clearness and intelligibility. Sanskrit, however, was clearly in large measure an artificial language to Bhavabh&umacr;ti; he employs far too freely rare terms culled from the lexicons, honourable to his scholarship but not to his taste, and the same lack of taste is displayed in the excess of his exaggerations. Of the sweetness and charm of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa he has as little as of the power of suggestion displayed by his predecessor; but he excels in drawing with a few strokes the typical features of a situation or emotion. He seeks propriety in his characters&apos; utterances; Janaka shows his philosophical training, as do the two ascetics in Act IV; Lava manifests his religious pupilship under V&amacr;lm&imacr;ki; Tamas&amacr; as a river goddess uses similes from the waters. Effective is the speech of the old chamberlain who addresses the newly-crowned R&amacr;ma as &lsquo;R&amacr;ma dear&rsquo; to remember the change and fall back on &lsquo;Your Majesty&rsquo;. It may be admitted also that in many passages Bhavabh&umacr;ti does produce effective concatenations of sounds, but only at the expense of natural expression and clearness of diction. The appreciation which he has excited in India is often due not to his real merits, but to admiration of these linguistic <hi>tours de force</hi>, such as the following:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>dorda&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;ñcitacandraçekharadhanurda&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;vabha&nmacr;godyata&sdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>&tdotb;a&nmacr;k&amacr;radhvanir &amacr;ryab&amacr;lacaritaprast&amacr;van&amacr;&ddotb;i&ndotb;&ddotb;ima&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>dr&amacr;kparyastakap&amacr;lasampu&tdotb;amiladbrahm&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;abh&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;odara&mdash;</hi>
    <l><hi>bhr&amacr;myatpi&ndotb;&ddotb;itaca&ndotb;&ddotb;im&amacr; katham aho n&amacr;dy&amacr;pi viçr&amacr;myati.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;The twang, emanating from the broken staff of Çiva&apos;s bow, bent by his staff-like arms, is the trumpet sound proclaiming to the <pb n=203 id=pb203 facs="f:203">world the youthful prowess of my noble brother; it ceases not yet, its reverberations enhanced by its rumbling through the interstices of the fragments of the universe rent asunder by the dread explosion.&rsquo; It may readily be admitted that the sound effect of such a verse is admirable, but it is attained only at the sacrifice of clearness and propriety of diction.


<div2 id=ch8.4 n=4>
<head><ab type=divNum>4.</ab> <hi>The Language and the Metres</hi></head>

<p>Bhavabh&umacr;ti, with his limited scope, confines himself to Çaurasen&imacr;, and models his style on Sanskrit, so that the speakers of Pr&amacr;krit are committed to the absurdity of elaborate style in what is supposed to be a vernacular. For him doubtless as for later poets the production of Pr&amacr;krit was a mechanical task of transforming Sanskrit according to the rules of Vararuci or other grammarians.

<p>In metre the <hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi> shows a free use of the Çloka, as is inevitable in an epic play; it is found 129 times; the Ç&amacr;rd&umacr;lavikr&imacr;&ddotb;ita (75), Vasantatilaka (39), Çikhari&ndotb;&imacr; (31), and Sragdhar&amacr; (28) are the other chief metres; the Upaj&amacr;ti, Mand&amacr;kr&amacr;nt&amacr;, and M&amacr;lin&imacr; are not rare, but the &Amacr;ry&amacr; (3) and G&imacr;ti (1) are almost gone, and there are only sporadic Aupacchandasika, Pu&sdotb;pit&amacr;gr&amacr;, P&rdotb;thv&imacr;, Prahar&sdotb;i&ndotb;&imacr;, Rathoddhat&amacr;, Va&ndota;çasth&amacr;, Ç&amacr;lin&imacr;, and Hari&ndotb;&imacr;. The <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi> has the same metres, save the Sragdhar&amacr;, a curious omission; it adds the Drutavilambita and Mañjubh&amacr;&sdotb;i&ndotb;&imacr;; the occurrences of the Çloka are 89, the Çikhari&ndotb;&imacr; is second (30), Vasantatilaka third (26), and Ç&amacr;rd&umacr;lavikr&imacr;&ddotb;ita fourth (25). The <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi> has the same metres as the <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi> plus the Narku&tdotb;aka<note n=1 id=n203.1>&#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &mdash; &#x23D1; &mdash; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &mdash; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &mdash; &#x23D1; &#x23D1; &mdash;.</note> and a Da&ndotb;&ddotb;aka of six short syllables and sixteen amphimacers; here the Vasantatilaka takes first place (49), Ç&amacr;rd&umacr;lavikr&imacr;&ddotb;ita (32), Çikhari&ndotb;&imacr; (21), and Hari&ndotb;&imacr; (12). The M&amacr;lin&imacr; (21) and Mand&amacr;kr&amacr;nt&amacr; (15) take on greater importance, while the Çloka is negligible (14). The fact that there are only 8 &Amacr;ry&amacr;s reflects the changed character of Bhavabh&umacr;ti&apos;s versification from that of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa.








<pb n=204 id=pb204 facs="f:204">
<div1 id=ch9 n=IX>
<head type=label>IX</head>

<head>VIÇ&Amacr;KHADATTA AND BHA&Tdotb;&Tdotb;A N&Amacr;R&Amacr;YA&Ndotb;A</head>


<div2 id=ch9.1 n=1>
<head><ab type=divNum>1.</ab> <hi>The Date of Viç&amacr;khadatta</hi></head>

<p>A curious vagueness besets our knowledge of Viç&amacr;khadatta or Viç&amacr;khadeva, son of the Mah&amacr;r&amacr;ja Bh&amacr;skaradatta or the minister P&rdotb;thu, grandson of the feudatory Va&tdotb;eçvaradatta. None of these persons are elsewhere known, and for his date we are reduced to conjectures. The play ends with a stanza mentioning Candragupta as would be natural in a play of which he is hero, but there are variants in the manuscripts, including Dantivarman, Rantivarman, and (A)vantivarman. The last has been utilized to fix the date, but in two different ways; Avantivarman might be the Maukhari king whose son married Har&sdotb;a&apos;s daughter, or the king of Kashmir (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 855&ndash;83); Jacobi<note n=1 id=n204.1>VOJ. ii. 212 ff.; <hi>contra</hi> Dhruva, VOJ. v. 25; Charpentier, JRAS. 1923, pp. 585 f.</note> identifies the eclipse referred to in the play as that of December 2, 860, when, he holds, Ç&umacr;ra, the king&apos;s minister, had the play performed. There is no conclusive argument for or against this clever combination. Konow<note n=2 id=n204.2>ID. pp. 70 f. Cf. Antani, IA. li. 49 f.; Winternitz, GIL. iii. 210.</note> sees in Candragupta the ruler of the Gupta line, and would make the poet a younger contemporary of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, but this is fantasy. We have some evidence of imitation of Ratn&amacr;kara by Viç&amacr;khadatta, but it is possibly not conclusive as to date. Still less weight attaches to the fact that in one manuscript the N&amacr;nd&imacr; is supposed to be over before the play begins, for that is merely a habit of South Indian manuscripts, true to the Bh&amacr;sa tradition. There is nothing that prevents a date in the ninth century, though the work may be earlier.<note n=3 id=n204.3>Keith, JRAS. 1909, pp. 145 f.; Hertel, ZDMG. lxx. 133 ff. It is later than the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, the <hi>Raghuva&ndota;ça</hi> (vii. 43 as compared with v. 23), and the <hi>Çiçup&amacr;lavadha</hi> (i. 47 as compared with the last verse).</note>



<pb n=205 id=pb205 facs="f:205">
<div2 id=ch9.2 n=2>
<head><ab type=divNum>2.</ab> <hi>The Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi></head>

<p>Whatever its date, the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi><note n=1 id=n205.1>Ed. A. Hillebrandt, Breslau, 1912; trs. Wilson, ii. 125 ff.; L. Fritze, Leipzig, 1886; V. Henry, Paris, 1888.</note> is one of the great Sanskrit dramas, although in India itself its merits have long been underrated, because it does not conform to the normal model. It is a drama of political intrigue, centred in the person of R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa, formerly minister of the Nandas, who is now sworn to revenge their destruction on C&amacr;&ndotb;akya, the Brahmin who vowed to ruin them, and who, in pursuance of this end, secured an alliance between Candragupta, their rival, and Parvateça<note n=2 id=n205.2>Or Parvataka. For an effort to extract history, see CHI. i. 470 ff. It must be regarded as very dubious.</note> and attacked P&amacr;&tdotb;aliputra. R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa seeing resistance vain surrendered the city; the last of the royal house, Sarv&amacr;rthasiddhi, retired to an ascetic life, and R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa left to weave plots elsewhere. His effort by a poison maiden to slay Candragupta miscarried; instead, Parvateça fell a victim through C&amacr;&ndotb;akya&apos;s cunning. This so far aided R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa that his son Malayaketu left Candragupta and is now his ally, preparing with the aid of a host of motley origin, including princes of Kul&umacr;ta, Malaya, Kashmir, Scind, and Persia to attack the capital. Act I shows C&amacr;&ndotb;akya&apos;s schemes; in a monologue he expresses his detestation of the Nandas and his determination to secure R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa as minister for his lord, for he is convinced of R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa&apos;s worth and has no desire himself to rule. Nipu&ndotb;aka, his spy, enters; he has found a Jain J&imacr;vasiddhi hostile to the king&mdash;he is in reality C&amacr;&ndotb;akya&apos;s agent; the scribe Çaka&tdotb;ad&amacr;sa is a real enemy, as is the jeweller Candanad&amacr;sa, in whose house are R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa&apos;s wife and child; by good fortune he has secured the signet ring of R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa, dropped by the former in pulling indoors the child. C&amacr;&ndotb;akya sees his chance; he writes a letter, has it copied in good faith by Çaka&tdotb;ad&amacr;sa and sealed with R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa&apos;s seal; Çaka&tdotb;ad&amacr;sa is then arrested, but on the point of impalement is rescued by Siddh&amacr;rthaka, another spy of the minister&apos;s, who flees to R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa; J&imacr;vasiddhi is banished in ignominy to the same destination, and Candanad&amacr;sa is flung into prison, to await death for having harboured R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa&apos;s family, which has escaped. Finally, it is reported that Bh&amacr;gur&amacr;ya&ndotb;a and others of the court are also fled, <pb n=206 id=pb206 facs="f:206">news received by C&amacr;&ndotb;akya with admirable composure, for they are also his emissaries.

<p>Act II shows R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa&apos;s counter-plots. Vir&amacr;dhaka, in a serpent-charmer&apos;s disguise, bears him news of ill import: the scheme to murder Candragupta, as he passed under a coronation arch, has failed, Vairodhaka, uncle of Malayaketu, who stayed when his nephew fled and had been crowned also as lord of half the realm, being slain in lieu of Candragupta; Abhayadatta, who offered him poison, has been forced to drink the draught; Pramodaka, the chamberlain, has flaunted the wealth sent to him to use in bribes, and is dead in misery; the bold spirits, who were to issue from a subterranean passage into the king&apos;s bedchamber, have been detected by the king through the sight of ants bearing a recent meal, and burnt in agony in their hiding place; J&imacr;vasiddhi is banished, Çaka&tdotb;ad&amacr;sa condemned to the stake, Candanad&amacr;sa to the same fate. The tale of woe is interrupted by the advent of Çaka&tdotb;ad&amacr;sa with Siddh&amacr;rthaka, who restores his seal to R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa, saying he had picked it up at Candanad&amacr;sa&apos;s house, and begs permission to remain in his train. Vir&amacr;dhaka now gives the one piece of good news: Candragupta is tired of C&amacr;&ndotb;akya. At this moment R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa is asked if he will buy some precious jewels, and hastily bids Çaka&tdotb;ad&amacr;sa see to the price, little knowing that they are sent by C&amacr;&ndotb;akya to entrap him. Act III displays C&amacr;&ndotb;akya at his ablest; a fine scene takes place between him and Candragupta, on the score that he has forbidden all feasting without telling the king; the monarch finally upbraids him, the minister taunts him with ingratitude and insolence, resigns office, and leaves in high dudgeon; none but the chief actors know the whole is but a ruse, and R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa&apos;s fortunes seem again fair. In Act IV the bright prospect begins to darken; Bh&amacr;gur&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, for the officials who have deserted to Malayaketu, explains to that monarch that they desire to deal direct with him, not R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa; the latter, they suggest, is no real foe of Candragupta; if C&amacr;&ndotb;akya were out of the way, there would be nothing to hinder his allying himself with Candragupta. The king is perplexed, and his doubt increases when he overhears a conversation between R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa and a courier who bears the glad tidings of the split between the king and C&amacr;&ndotb;akya; R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa eagerly exclaims that Candragupta is now in the palms of his hands <pb n=207 id=pb207 facs="f:207">(<hi>hastatalagata</hi>), a phrase which unhappily lends itself to the suspicious interpretation that he meditates alliance with that king. Malayaketu&apos;s conversation with R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa, which ensues, leaves him half-hearted for an advance, for he cannot rid himself of his suspicions of the minister. The Act ends with J&imacr;vasiddhi&apos;s admission to see R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa, who asks him in vain for intelligible advice as to the time for an advance, receiving in lieu much astrological lore and what is really a presage of disaster. This is achieved in Act V. First J&imacr;vasiddhi approaches Bh&amacr;gur&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, who is entrusted with the grant of permits to leave the camp, and admits&mdash;with feigned reluctance&mdash;in order to get a permit, that he fears R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa, who used him formerly when he was arranging for the poisoning of Parvateça, but now seeks to slay him. The king, who overhears this, is wild with rage; he had deemed his father slain by C&amacr;&ndotb;akya, and Bh&amacr;gur&amacr;ya&ndotb;a has great difficulty in persuading him that R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa&apos;s action might be deemed justifiable, and that at any rate vengeance must wait. Siddh&amacr;rthaka, however, now appears a prisoner, caught trying to escape without a passport; beaten, he finally gives evidence against R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa in the shape of the letter written in Act I by Çaka&tdotb;ad&amacr;sa, which he asserts he was to bear from R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa to Candragupta, a jewel sealed, like the letter, with R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa&apos;s seal&mdash;one given by Malayaketu to R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa and by him to Siddh&amacr;rthaka for rescuing Çaka&tdotb;ad&amacr;sa, and a verbal message, stating the terms demanded by the allied kings for their treachery, and R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa&apos;s own demand, the removal of C&amacr;&ndotb;akya. The king confronts R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa with the proofs, and the minister has made his case worse from the start, for, asked the order of march proposed, he assigns to the allied kings the proud duty of guarding the king&apos;s person, which Malayaketu interprets as a device to facilitate their treachery. R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa is bewildered; he can deny the message, but the seal and the writing are genuine; can Çaka&tdotb;ad&amacr;sa have turned traitor through fear? The argument against him is clinched by the king&apos;s seeing that he wears a fine jewel, one of those purchased at the close of Act II; it was the king&apos;s father&apos;s, and must, he insists, be the price of the minister&apos;s treachery. Incensed, the foolish king gives orders to bury alive those allied kings who craved territory as their reward, and to trample under elephants those who sought them as their share. <pb n=208 id=pb208 facs="f:208">All is confusion, and R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa, insolently spared, slips away to fulfil his duty of rescuing his friend Candanad&amacr;sa.

<p>Act VI reveals R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa in the capital deeply soliloquizing on the failure of all his ends, and the fate of his friend. A spy of Candragupta&apos;s approaches him, and passes himself off as one seeking death, in despair for Candanad&amacr;sa&apos;s fate, on which Candragupta&apos;s mind is relentlessly set. He warns R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa that he may not attempt a rescue, for, when they fear one, the executioners slay the victim out of hand, and R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa sees that nothing save self-sacrifice is left for him. The net is now firmly cast; Act VII sees Candanad&amacr;sa led out to death, his wife and child beside him, a scene manifestly imitated from the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>; the wife is determined to die also, but R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa intervenes; C&amacr;&ndotb;akya and Candragupta come on the scene, and R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa decides to accept the office of minister pressed on him by both, when thus alone he can save, not his own life, but that of Candanad&amacr;sa and his friends. They, indeed, are in sore case, for Malayaketu&apos;s massacre of the kings has broken the host into fragments, and the apparent rebels have taken the moment to capture him and his court. As minister, R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa is permitted to free Malayaketu and restore his lands, Candanad&amacr;sa is rewarded, and a general amnesty approved.

<p>The interest in the action never flags; the characters of C&amacr;&ndotb;akya and R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa are excellent foils. Each in his own way is admirable; C&amacr;&ndotb;akya in his undying and just hatred of the Nandas, and R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa in his unsparing devotion to their cause, his noble desire to save Candanad&amacr;sa, and his fine submission, for the sake of others, to a yoke he had purposed never to bear. The maxims of politics in which both delight may amuse us; they are essentially the Indian views of polity and give the play a contact with reality which Professor Lévi<note n=1 id=n208.1>TI. i. 226 f.</note> wrongly denies; the plots and counterplots of both ministers are the type in which Indian polity has ever delighted. The minor figures are all interesting; Siddh&amacr;rthaka and Samiddh&amacr;rthaka, gentlemen who even disguise themselves as Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;las in the last Act, so that they may serve C&amacr;&ndotb;akya&apos;s aims; Nipu&ndotb;aka, whose cleverness in finding the seal justifies the name he bears; the disguised Vir&amacr;dhaka, the honest Çaka&tdotb;ad&amacr;sa, the noble Candanad&amacr;sa and <pb n=209 id=pb209 facs="f:209">his wife, the one female figure in the play. The kings Candragupta and Malayaketu represent the contrast of ripe intelligence with youthful ardour, and the weak petulance of one who does not know men&apos;s worth, and who rashly and cruelly slays his allies on the faith of treachery. Bh&amacr;gur&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, who is the false friend deluding Malayaketu in Candragupta&apos;s interest, is a carefully drawn figure; he dislikes the work, but dismisses his repulsion as essentially the result of dependence which forbids a man to judge between right and wrong.

<p>Viç&amacr;khadatta&apos;s diction is admirably forcible and direct; the martial character of his dramas reflects itself in the clearness and rapidity of his style, which eschews the deplorable compounds which disfigure Bhavabh&umacr;ti&apos;s works. An artist in essentials, he uses images, metaphors, and similes with tasteful moderation; alone of the later dramatists, he realizes that he is writing a drama, not composing sets<note n=1 id=n209.1>His ability in this regard can be seen in the jingle of Malayaketu&apos;s lament in v. 16.</note> of elegant extracts. Hence is explained the paucity of citations from him in the anthologies, which naturally find little to their purpose in an author of a more manly strain than is usual in the drama. It is significant that the <hi>Subh&amacr;&sdotb;it&amacr;vali</hi> cites but two stanzas, under his name, as Viç&amacr;khadeva, both pretty but undistinguished; the second<note n=2 id=n209.2>v. 1728.</note> is graceful:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>sendrac&amacr;pai&hdotb; ç&rdotb;t&amacr; meghair nipatannirjhar&amacr; nag&amacr;&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>var&ndotb;akambalasa&mdota;v&imacr;t&amacr; babhur mattadvip&amacr; iva.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;The mountains, with their leaping waterfalls, girt with rainbow clouds, shone like rutting elephants clad in raiment of bright hue.&rsquo;

<p>More characteristic is the terse and effective phraseology in which he describes the dilemma of Malayaketu when his mind has been poisoned against R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa:<note n=3 id=n209.3><hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, v. 5.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>bhakty&amacr; Nandakul&amacr;nur&amacr;gad&rdotb;&ddotb;hay&amacr; Nand&amacr;nvay&amacr;lambin&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>ki&mdota; C&amacr;&ndotb;akyanir&amacr;k&rdotb;tena k&rdotb;tin&amacr; Maurye&ndotb;a sa&mdota;dh&amacr;syate</hi>
    <l><hi>sthairyam bhaktigu&ndotb;asya v&amacr; viga&ndotb;ayan satyasandho bhavet</hi>
    <l><hi>ity &amacr;r&umacr;&ddotb;hakul&amacr;lacakram iva me cetaç ciram bhr&amacr;myati.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;His loyalty was founded on his love for the family of Nanda, it rested on a scion of that house; now that the cunning Maurya is severed from C&amacr;&ndotb;akya, will he make terms with him? Or, <pb n=210 id=pb210 facs="f:210">faithful ever in loyalty, will he keep his pact with me? Perplexed with these thoughts my mind revolves as on a potter&apos;s wheel.&rsquo;

<p>There is effective gravity in the manner in which the aged chamberlain handles the regular topic of his failing powers in old age:<note n=1 id=n210.1>iii. i.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>r&umacr;p&amacr;d&imacr;n vi&sdotb;ay&amacr;n nir&umacr;pya kara&ndotb;air yair &amacr;tmal&amacr;bhas tvay&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>labdhas te&sdotb;v api cak&sdotb;ur&amacr;di&sdotb;u hat&amacr;&hdotb; sv&amacr;rth&amacr;vabodhakriy&amacr;&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>a&nmacr;g&amacr;ni prasabha&mdotb; tyajanti pa&tdotb;ut&amacr;m &amacr;jñ&amacr;vidhey&amacr;ni me</hi>
    <l><hi>nyastam m&umacr;rdhni pada&mdota; tavaiva jaray&amacr; t&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;e mudh&amacr; t&amacr;myasi.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Sight, alas, and the other organs, wherewith aforetime I was wont to grasp for myself the sights and objects of desire which I beheld, have lost their power of action. My limbs obey me not and suddenly have lost their cunning; thy foot is placed on my head, old age; vainly, O desire, dost thou weary thyself.&rsquo;

<p>R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa&apos;s name inevitably demands the usual play on its sense of demoniac, but Malayaketu&apos;s feeling redeems the use from triviality:<note n=2 id=n210.2>v. 7.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>mitram mam&amacr;yam iti nirv&rdotb;tacittav&rdotb;ttim</hi>
    <l><hi>viçrambhatas tvayi niveçitasarvak&amacr;ryam</hi>
    <l><hi>t&amacr;ta&mdota; nip&amacr;tya saha bandhujan&amacr;k&sdotb;itoyair</hi>
    <l><hi>anvarthasa&mdotb;jña nanu R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa r&amacr;k&sdotb;aso &apos;si?</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;My father&apos;s mind rested secure in thy friendship; in his confidence he entrusted to thee the whole burden of his affairs; when, then, thou didst bring him low midst the tears of all his kin, didst thou not act, O R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa, like the demon whose name thou dost bear?&rsquo;

<p>The martial spirit of R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa is admirably brought out in Act II:<note n=3 id=n210.3>ii. 14.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>prak&amacr;r&amacr;n parita&hdotb; çar&amacr;sanadharai&hdotb; k&sdotb;ipram parik&sdotb;ipyat&amacr;m</hi>
    <l><hi>dv&amacr;re&sdotb;u dvipadai&hdotb; pratidvipagha&tdotb;&amacr;bhedak&sdotb;amai&hdotb; sth&imacr;yat&amacr;m</hi>
    <l><hi>muktv&amacr; m&rdotb;tyubhayam prahartumanasa&hdotb; çatror bale durbale</hi>
    <l><hi>te niry&amacr;ntu may&amacr; sahaikamanaso ye&sdotb;&amacr;m abh&imacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;a&mdota; yaça&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Around the ramparts be the archers set at once; station at the portals the elephants, strong to overthrow the host of the foeman&apos;s herd; lay fear aside, in eagerness to smite the host of the foe that cannot withstand us, and issue forth with me with one <pb n=211 id=pb211 facs="f:211">accord, all to whom glory is dear.&rsquo; The burden of duty is expressed admirably:<note n=1 id=n211.1>ii. 19.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>ki&mdota; Çe&sdotb;asya bharavyath&amacr; na vapu&sdotb;i k&sdotb;&amacr;&mdota; na k&sdotb;ipaty e&sdotb;a yat</hi>
    <l><hi>ki&mdota; v&amacr; n&amacr;sti pariçramo dinapater &amacr;ste na yan niçcala&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>ki&mdota; tv a&nmacr;g&imacr;k&rdotb;tam uts&rdotb;jan kira&ndotb;avac chl&amacr;ghyo jano lajjate</hi>
    <l><hi>nirvy&umacr;&ddotb;hi&hdotb; pratipannavastu&sdotb;u sat&amacr;m eka&mdota; hi gotravratam.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Is it because Çe&sdotb;a feels not the pain of the burden of the earth that he flings it not aside? Is it that the sun feels no weariness that he does not stand still in his course? Nay, a noble man feels shame to lay aside the duty he has taken on him, like a meaner creature; for the good this is the one common law, to be faithful to what one has undertaken.&rsquo; The minister&apos;s resolve to save his friend is forcibly put:<note n=2 id=n211.2>vi. 21.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>aud&amacr;s&imacr;nya&mdota; na yukta&mdota; priyasu&hdotb;rdi gate matk&rdotb;t&amacr;m eva ghor&amacr;m</hi>
    <l><hi>vy&amacr;patti&mdota; jñ&amacr;tam asya svatanum aham im&amacr;&mdota; ni&sdotb;kraya&mdota; kalpay&amacr;mi.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Indifference is impossible since my dear friend has fallen into this disaster for my sake; I have it: my own life do I set as ransom for his.&rsquo; There is grim humour in the command of the infuriated Malayaketu:<note n=3 id=n211.3>p. 154.</note> &lsquo;Those who desired my land, take and cast into a pit and cover with dust; those two who sought my army of elephants slay by an elephant,&rsquo; and in the Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;la&apos;s remark<note n=4 id=n211.4>p. 189.</note> when he bids his friend impale Candanad&amacr;sa: &lsquo;His family will go off quickly enough of their own accord.&rsquo; The revelation of J&imacr;vasiddhi&apos;s treachery wrings from R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa the cry:<note n=5 id=n211.5>p. 153.</note> &lsquo;My very heart has been made their own by my foes (<hi lang=sa-Latn>h&rdotb;dayam api me ripubhi&hdotb; sv&imacr;k&rdotb;tam</hi>).&rsquo; Proverbs are aptly used, as in the same context the Sanskrit equivalent for an accumulation of evils (<hi lang=sa-Latn>ayam aparo ga&ndotb;&ddotb;asyopari spho&tdotb;a&hdotb;</hi>).


<div2 id=ch9.3 n=3>
<head><ab type=divNum>3.</ab> <hi>The Language and the Metres of the Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi></head>

<p>The Sanskrit of the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi> is classical, and the Pr&amacr;krits number three, for, in addition to the normal Çaurasen&imacr; and M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr;, M&amacr;gadh&imacr; is used by the Jain monk, by Siddh&amacr;rthaka and Samiddh&amacr;rthaka as Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;las, by a servant and an envoy. We may take it that Viç&amacr;khadatta wrote from the grammars, and this is confirmed by the fact that we find in some <pb n=212 id=pb212 facs="f:212">of the manuscripts traces of the carrying through of characteristic M&amacr;gadh&imacr; features, <hi>ññ</hi> for <hi>&ndotb;&ndotb;</hi> for Sanskrit <hi>ny</hi>; <hi>&hbarb;k</hi> for <hi>k&sdotb;</hi>; <hi>çc</hi> for <hi>cch</hi>, <hi>st</hi> for <hi>sth</hi>, <hi>s&tdotb;</hi> for <hi>&sdotb;&tdotb;</hi> and for <hi>&sdotb;&tdotb;h</hi>, and the usual <hi>ç</hi>, <hi>l</hi>, and <hi>e</hi>. It is possible, of course, that these are no more than restorations by scribes, but they may easily be more venerable. It is also interesting to note that there appear traces of Çaurasen&imacr; verses, which is perfectly possible, as the theory does not necessitate all persons who use Çaurasen&imacr; in prose singing in M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr;; that is given as requisite for women only, and in this play they are men who use these Çaurasen&imacr; verses.

<p>The metres most used are Ç&amacr;rd&umacr;lavikr&imacr;&ddotb;ita (39), Sragdhar&amacr; (24), Vasantatilaka (19), and Çikhari&ndotb;&imacr; (18); the Çloka occurs also 22 times. Other metres are sporadic, save Pr&amacr;krit &Amacr;ry&amacr;s; they include Upaj&amacr;ti, Aupacchandasika, Pu&sdotb;pit&amacr;gr&amacr;, Prahar&sdotb;i&ndotb;&imacr;, M&amacr;lin&imacr;, Mand&amacr;kr&amacr;nt&amacr;, Rucir&amacr;, Va&ndota;çasth&amacr;, Suvadan&amacr; (iv. 16), and Hari&ndotb;&imacr;.


<div2 id=ch9.4 n=4>
<head><ab type=divNum>4.</ab> <hi>The Date of Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi></head>

<p>The age of Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, M&rdotb;gar&amacr;jalak&sdotb;man is unknown. But he is cited by V&amacr;mana (iv. 3. 28) and &Amacr;nandavardhana<note n=1 id=n212.1>Ed. KM. pp. 80, 150.</note> and so is before <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 800. Tradition, preserved in the Tagore family, makes him out to be a Brahmin summoned from Kanyakubja to Bengal by &Amacr;dis&umacr;ra, the founder of a dynasty of eleven kings, who are supposed to have reigned before the P&amacr;la dynasty came to the throne in the middle of the eighth century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> It has been suggested<note n=2 id=n212.2>Konow, ID. p. 77.</note> that it was identical with the Guptas of Magadha since &Amacr;dityasena, son of M&amacr;dhavagupta of Magadha, made himself independent of Kanyakubja; this would make &Amacr;dis&umacr;ra &Amacr;dityasena, who was alive in <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 671. The date, however, is clearly conjectural for the present.


<div2 id=ch9.5 n=5>
<head><ab type=divNum>5.</ab> <hi>The Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</hi></head>

<p>Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a has chosen as his topic<note n=3 id=n212.3>Ed. J. Grill, Leipzig, 1871; Bombay, 1905; trs. S. M. Tagore, Calcutta, 1880. Traces of different recensions exist.</note> one episode from the great epic and has endeavoured to make it capable of dramatic representation. One of the worst of the insults heaped on Draupad&imacr; in the gambling scene of the epic is the dragging of her by the hair before the assembly by Du&hdotb;ç&amacr;sana, one of the <pb n=213 id=pb213 facs="f:213">Kauravas. Draupad&imacr; vows never to braid her hair again until the insult is avenged, as it ultimately is.

<p>Act I shows Bh&imacr;ma in conversation with Sahadeva as they await the result of K&rdotb;&sdotb;na&apos;s visit as an envoy to seek to settle the <corr sic=fued>feud</corr> between <corr sic="P&amacr;&ndotb;davas">P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;avas</corr> and Kauravas; Bh&imacr;ma shows his insolent confidence in his power and his bitter anger, by declaring that he will break with Yudhi&sdotb;&tdotb;hira if he makes peace before the insult to Draupad&imacr; has been avenged. Sahadeva in vain seeks to appease him, and Draupad&imacr; adds to his bitterness by relating a fresh insult in a careless allusion by Duryodhana&apos;s queen. K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a returns, nothing effected; indeed he has had to use his magic arms to escape detention in the enemies&apos; camp. War is inevitable, but Draupad&imacr;, more human now, bids her husbands take care of their lives against the enemy. Act II opens with an ominous dream of Bh&amacr;numat&imacr;, Duryodhana&apos;s queen; an ichneumon (<hi>nakula</hi>) has slain a hundred serpents; it is a presage that the P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;avas&mdash;of whom Nakula is one&mdash;will slay the hundred Kauravas. The king, overhearing but not understanding, thinks he is betrayed; learning the truth, at first he inclines to fear, but shakes off the temporary depression. The queen offers oblation to the sun to remove the evil omen; the king appears to comfort her: a storm arises, and they seek security in a pavilion, where they indulge in passages of love. Then appears the mother of Jayadratha of Sindhu, slayer of Abhimanyu, son of Arjuna, who fears the revenge of the P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;avas; Duryodhana makes light of her fears; he despises the resentment of the P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;avas, gloating over the remembrance of the insults heaped on Draupad&imacr;. Finally he mounts his chariot for the battle. Act III presents an episode of horror but also of power; a R&amacr;k&sdotb;as&imacr; and her husband feed on the blood and flesh of the dead on the battlefield; they have been summoned thither, for Gha&tdotb;otkaca, son of Hi&ddotb;imb&amacr; by Bh&imacr;ma, is dead, and his demon mother has bidden them attend Bh&imacr;ma in his revenge on the Kuru host. They see the first-fruits in Dro&ndotb;a&apos;s death at the hands of Dh&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;adyumna, when he lets fall his arms, deceived by the lie of his son&apos;s death. They retire before Açvatth&amacr;man who advances, but is filled with grief when he learns of the treacherous device which cost his father&apos;s life. His uncle K&rdotb;pa consoles him, and bids him ask Duryodhana for the command in the battle. But in the meantime Kar&ndotb;a has poisoned Duryodhana&apos;s mind; Dro&ndotb;a had fought, <pb n=214 id=pb214 facs="f:214">only to win the imperial authority for his son, and has sacrificed his life in disappointment at the failure of his plans. K&rdotb;pa and Açvatth&amacr;man come up; Duryodhana condoles, Kar&ndotb;a sneers, Açvatth&amacr;man asks for the command, but is refused it, as Kar&ndotb;a has been promised it. Açvatth&amacr;man quarrels with Kar&ndotb;a, and a duel is barely prevented; Açvatth&amacr;man accuses Duryodhana of partiality, and will fight no more. Their disputes are interrupted by Bh&imacr;ma&apos;s boast that he will now slay Du&hdotb;ç&amacr;sana; Kar&ndotb;a at Açvatth&amacr;man&apos;s instigation makes ready to rescue him, Duryodhana follows suit, Açvatth&amacr;man would go also, but is stayed by a voice from heaven and can only bid K&rdotb;pa lend his aid.

<p>In Act IV Duryodhana is brought in wounded; recovering, he learns of Du&hdotb;ç&amacr;sana&apos;s death and a Kuru disaster; a messenger from Kar&ndotb;a tells in a long Pr&amacr;krit speech of the death of Kar&ndotb;a&apos;s son, and gives an appeal for aid written in Kar&ndotb;a&apos;s blood. Duryodhana makes ready for battle, but is interrupted by the arrival of his parents, Dh&rdotb;tar&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;ra and G&amacr;ndh&amacr;r&imacr; with Sañjaya, whose advent begins Act V. The aged couple and Sañjaya urge in vain Duryodhana to peace; he refuses, and again, hearing of Kar&ndotb;a&apos;s death, unaided, is ready to part for the field, when Arjuna and Bh&imacr;ma appear; Bh&imacr;ma insists on their saluting with insults their uncle; Duryodhana reproves them, but Arjuna insists that it is just retribution for the acquiescence of the aged king in Draupad&imacr;&apos;s ill-treatment. Duryodhana defies Bh&imacr;ma, who would fight, but Arjuna forbids, and Yudhi&sdotb;&tdotb;hira&apos;s summons takes them away. Açvatth&amacr;man arrives, and seeks reconciliation with Duryodhana, who receives him coldly; he withdraws, followed by Sañjaya, bidden by Dh&rdotb;tar&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;ra to appease him.

<p>Act VI tells us from an announcement to Yudhi&sdotb;&tdotb;hira and Draupad&imacr; of Duryodhana&apos;s death at Bh&imacr;ma&apos;s hands. But a C&amacr;rv&amacr;ka comes in, who tells a very different story; Bh&imacr;ma and Arjuna are dead. Yudhi&sdotb;&tdotb;hira and Draupad&imacr; resolve on death, and the C&amacr;rv&amacr;ka, who is really a R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa, departs in glee. When, however, they are about to die, a noise is heard; Yudhi&sdotb;&tdotb;hira, deeming it Duryodhana, rushes to arms, while Draupad&imacr; runs away, and is caught by her hair by Bh&imacr;ma, whom Yudhi&sdotb;&tdotb;hira seizes. The ludicrous error is discovered, and Draupad&imacr; binds up at last her locks. Arjuna and V&amacr;sudeva arrive, the C&amacr;rv&amacr;ka has been slain by Nakula, and all is well.

<p>The play is on the whole undramatic, for the action is choked <pb n=215 id=pb215 facs="f:215">by narrative, and the vast abundance of detail served up in this form confuses and destroys interest. Yet the characterization is good; Duryodhana, as in the later Indian tradition, is unlovable; he is proud and arrogant, self-confident, vain, and selfish; he laughs at Bh&amacr;numat&imacr;&apos;s fears and has no sympathy for the maternal anxiety of Jayadratha&apos;s mother. He is suspicious of Dro&ndotb;a and Açvatth&amacr;man, and thus deprives himself of their effective aid; Kar&ndotb;a, whose jealous advice he accepts, he leaves to perish. Bh&imacr;ma again is a bloodthirsty and boastful bully; Arjuna is equally valiant, but he is less an undisciplined savage, while K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a intervenes with wise moderation. Yudhi&sdotb;&tdotb;hira is, as ever, grave and more concerned with the interest of his subjects than his personal feelings. Horror and pathos are not lacking, but the love interest is certainly not effective, and it may be that it was forced on the author by tradition rather than any thought of producing a real interest of itself. Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a&apos;s slavish fidelity to rule brought him censure even from Indian critics.

<p>The style of the play is clear and not lacking either in force or dignity: dismayed by the dream of Bh&amacr;numat&imacr; Duryodhana comforts himself.<note n=1 id=n215.1>ii. 41.</note> A&nmacr;giras says:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>grah&amacr;&ndotb;&amacr;&mdota; carita&mdota; svapno nimitt&amacr;ny upay&amacr;citam</hi>
    <l><hi>phalanti k&amacr;kat&amacr;l&imacr;ya&mdota; tebhya&hdotb; prajñ&amacr; na bibhyati.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;The movements of the planets, dreams, omens, oblations, bear fruit by accident; therefore wise men fear them not.&rsquo; Graceful is his address to Bh&amacr;numat&imacr; if out of place:<note n=2 id=n215.2>ii. 47.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>kuru ghanoru pad&amacr;ni çanai&hdotb; çanair: api vimuñca gati&mdota; parivepin&imacr;m</hi>
    <l><hi>patasi b&amacr;hulatopanibandhanam: mama nip&imacr;&ddotb;aya g&amacr;&ddotb;ham ura&hdotb;sthalam.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;O firm-limbed one, make slow thy steps; stay thy trembling gait; thou dost fall into the shelter of my arms; clasp me closely in thine embrace.&rsquo; But any display of tenderness is abnormal in Duryodhana; he rebukes his aged mother when she urges him to save his life by coming to terms with the enemy:<note n=3 id=n215.3>v. 120.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>m&amacr;ta&hdotb; kim apy asad&rdotb;ça&mdota; vik&rdotb;ta&mdota; vacas te: suk&sdotb;atriy&amacr; kva bhavat&imacr; kva ca d&imacr;natai&sdotb;&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>nirvatsale sutaçatasya vipattim et&amacr;m: tva&mdota; n&amacr;nucintayasi rak&sdotb;asi m&amacr;m ayogyam.</hi>
</lg>

<pb n=216 id=pb216 facs="f:216"><p rend=noindent>&lsquo;O mother, strange and unseemly is thy bidding. Ill accord thy noble birth and this faintness of spirit. Shame on thee, without natural affection, in that thou dost forget the cruel fate of thy hundred sons in seeking to save my life.&rsquo; In vain is <corr sic="D&hdotb;rtar&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;ra&apos;s">Dh&rdotb;tar&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;ra&apos;s</corr> manly appeal to him:<note n=1 id=n216.1>v. 122.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>d&amacr;y&amacr;d&amacr; na yayor balena ga&ndotb;it&amacr;s tau Dro&ndotb;abh&imacr;&sdotb;mau hatau</hi>
    <l><hi>Kar&ndotb;asy&amacr;tmajam agrata&hdotb; çamayato bh&imacr;ta&mdota; jagat Ph&amacr;lgun&amacr;t</hi>
    <l><hi>vats&amacr;n&amacr;&mdota; nidhanena me tvayi ripu&hdotb; çesapratijño &apos;dhun&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>krodha&mdota; vairi&sdotb;u muñca vatsa pitar&amacr;v andh&amacr;v imau p&amacr;laya.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Slain are Dro&ndotb;a and Bh&imacr;&sdotb;ma whose peers none were deemed in might; all shrank in terror before Arjuna as he slew Kar&ndotb;a&apos;s son before his eyes; my dear ones slain, the foe&apos;s whole aim is against thee now; lay aside thine anger with thy foes, and guard these thy blind parents.&rsquo; Admirably expressed is Bh&imacr;ma&apos;s wild fury when he disdains Yudhi&sdotb;&tdotb;hira&apos;s effort to secure peace:<note n=2 id=n216.2>i. 15.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>mathn&amacr;mi Kauravaçata&mdota; samare na kop&amacr;d: Du&hdotb;ç&amacr;sanasya rudhira&mdota; na pib&amacr;my urasta&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>sa&mdota;c&umacr;r&ndotb;ay&amacr;mi gaday&amacr; na Suyodhanoru: sandhi&mdota; karotu bhavat&amacr;&mdota; n&rdotb;pati&hdotb; pa&ndotb;ena.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Shall I not in anger crush the hundred Kauravas in battle; shall I not drink the blood from Du&hdotb;ç&amacr;sana&apos;s breast; shall I not break with my club the thighs of Duryodhana, although your master buy peace at a price?&rsquo; Admirable also is his description of the sacrifice of battle:<note n=3 id=n216.3>i. 25.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>catv&amacr;ro vayam &rdotb;tvija&hdotb; sa bhagav&amacr;n karmopade&sdotb;&tdotb;&amacr; hari&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>sa&mdota;gr&amacr;m&amacr;dhvarad&imacr;k&sdotb;ito narapati&hdotb; patn&imacr; g&rdotb;h&imacr;tavrat&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>Kauravy&amacr;&hdotb; paçava&hdotb; priy&amacr;paribhavakleçopaç&amacr;nti&hdotb; phalam</hi>
    <l><hi>r&amacr;janyopanimantra&ndotb;&amacr;ya rasati sph&imacr;ta&mdota; yaçodundubhi&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;We are the four priests, and the blessed Hari himself directs the rite; the king has consecrated himself for the sacrament of battle, the queen has taken on herself the vow; the Kauravyas are the victims, the end to be achieved the extinction of our loved one&apos;s bitterness of shame at the insult done her; loudly the drum of fame summons the warrior to the fray.&rsquo; Equally effective is his summing up of his feat:<note n=4 id=n216.4>vi. 197.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>bh&umacr;mau k&sdotb;ipta&mdota; çar&imacr;ra&mdota; nihitam idam as&rdotb;k candanam Bh&imacr;mag&amacr;tre</hi>
    <pb n=217 id=pb217 facs="f:217"><l><hi>lak&sdotb;m&imacr;r &amacr;rye ni&sdotb;a&ndotb;&ndotb;&amacr; caturudadhipaya&hdotb;s&imacr;may&amacr; s&amacr;rdham urvy&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>bh&rdotb;ty&amacr; mitr&amacr;&ndotb;i yodh&amacr;&hdotb; Kurukulam akhila&mdota; dagdham etadra&ndotb;&amacr;gnau</hi>
    <l><hi>n&amacr;maika&mdota; yad brav&imacr;&sdotb;i k&sdotb;itipa tad adhun&amacr; Dh&amacr;rtar&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;rasya çe&sdotb;am.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;His body is cast upon the ground; his blood is smeared as sandal paste on Bh&imacr;ma&apos;s limbs; the goddess of fortune, with the earth bounded by the waters of the four oceans, rests on my noble brother&apos;s lap; servants, friends, warriors, the whole house of the Kurus has been burned in this fire of battle; the name alone, O king, is left of Dh&rdotb;tar&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;ra&apos;s race.&rsquo; Effective is the appeal which Dh&rdotb;tar&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;ra bids the faithful Sañjaya address to the righteously indignant Açvatth&amacr;man:<note n=1 id=n217.1>v. 157.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>smarati na bhav&amacr;n p&imacr;ta&mdota; stanya&mdota; cir&amacr;ya sah&amacr;mun&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>mama ca malina&mdota; k&sdotb;aumam b&amacr;lye tvada&nmacr;gavivartanai&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>anujanidhanasph&imacr;t&amacr;c chok&amacr;d atipra&ndotb;ay&amacr;c ca tad&mdash;</hi>
    <l><hi>vik&rdotb;tavacane m&amacr;smin krodhaç cira&mdota; kriyat&amacr;&mdota; tvay&amacr;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Forget not the milk which thou didst so long drink from the same breast with him; forget not my robe that thy childish feet so often soiled in play; his grief is bitter for the death of the younger brother whom he loved so dearly; be not, therefore, wroth for the unjust words he hath spoken to thee.&rsquo;

<p>On the other hand, we find in Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a many of the defects of Bhavabh&umacr;ti, in special the fondness for long compounds both in Pr&amacr;krit and in Sanskrit prose<note n=2 id=n217.2>E.g. vi, p. 87 (Sanskrit); v, p. 59 (Pr&amacr;krit).</note> and the same straining after effect which gives such a description of the battle as that vouchsafed to Draupad&imacr; by Bh&imacr;ma, when she warns him nor to be overrash in battle:<note n=3 id=n217.3>i. 27.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>anyony&amacr;sph&amacr;labhinnadviparudhiravas&amacr;m&amacr;&ndota;samasti&sdotb;kapa&nmacr;ke</hi>
    <l><hi>magn&amacr;n&amacr;&mdota; syandan&amacr;n&amacr;m upari k&rdotb;tapadany&amacr;savikr&amacr;ntapattau</hi>
    <l><hi>sph&imacr;t&amacr;s&rdotb;kp&amacr;nago&sdotb;&tdotb;h&imacr;rasadaçivaçiv&amacr;t&umacr;ryan&rdotb;tyatkabandhe</hi>
    <l><hi>samgr&amacr;maik&amacr;r&ndotb;av&amacr;nta&hdotb;payasi vicaritum pa&ndotb;&ddotb;it&amacr;&hdotb; P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;uputr&amacr;&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;The sons of P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;u are well skilled to disport in the waters of the ocean of the battle, wherein dance headless corpses to the music of the unholy jackals, that yell in joy as they drink the thick blood of the dead, and the footmen in their valour leap over the chariots that are sunk in the mud of the blood, fat, <pb n=218 id=pb218 facs="f:218">flesh, and brains of the elephants shattered in mutual onslaught.&rsquo; The adaptation of sound to sense here is doubtless admirable, and the picture drawn is vivid in a painful degree, but the style is too laboured to be attractive to modern taste.

<p>None the less N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a has the merit, shared by Viç&amacr;khadatta, of fire and energy; much of the fierce dialogue is brutal and violent, but it lives with a reality and warmth which is lacking in the tedious contests in boasting, which burden all the descriptions in the R&amacr;ma dramas of the meeting of R&amacr;ma and Paraçur&amacr;ma. Duryodhana is not behind Bh&imacr;ma himself in insolence, though perhaps more subtle than that of the violent son of the Wind-god:<note n=1 id=n218.1>v. 146.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>k&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;&amacr; keçe&sdotb;u bh&amacr;ry&amacr; tava tava ca paços tasya r&amacr;jñas tayor v&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>pratyak&sdotb;am bh&umacr;pat&imacr;n&amacr;m mama bhuvanapater &amacr;jñay&amacr; dy&umacr;tad&amacr;s&imacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>tasmin vair&amacr;nubandhe vada kim apak&rdotb;ta&mdota; tair hat&amacr; ye narendr&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>b&amacr;hvor v&imacr;ry&amacr;tibh&amacr;radravi&ndotb;agurumadam m&amacr;m ajitvaiva darpa&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Thy wife&mdash;whether thine, O beast, or that king&apos;s or the twins&apos;&mdash;was seized by the hair, in the presence of all the princes, by my command as lord of the earth, she won as my slave at the dice. With this abiding cause of hatred between us, say what wrong was wrought by the kings whom thou hast slain? When thou hast not conquered me, why vainly dost thou boast of the cumbrous strength of thy huge arms?&rsquo;

<p>Violent as is the language, there is some excuse for it in the extraordinarily heartless character of Bh&imacr;ma&apos;s address to the ill-fated Dh&rdotb;tar&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;ra, which almost justifies the recalling of the disgraceful slight put on Draupad&imacr;:<note n=2 id=n218.2>v. 144.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>nihat&amacr;çe&sdotb;akauravya&hdotb; k&sdotb;&imacr;bo Du&hdotb;ç&amacr;san&amacr;s&rdotb;j&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>bha&nmacr;kt&amacr; Duryodhanasyorvor Bh&imacr;mo &apos;ya&mdota; çiras&amacr; nata&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Bh&imacr;ma bows low his head before thy feet, Bh&imacr;ma who has slain all the scions of Kuru, who is drunk with the blood of Du&hdotb;ç&amacr;sana, and who shall shatter the thighs of Duryodhana.&rsquo; Effectively contrasted is the stern, but courteous rebuke addressed by Yudhi&sdotb;&tdotb;hira to K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a&apos;s elder brother:<note n=3 id=n218.3>vi. 178.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>jñ&amacr;tipr&imacr;tir manasi na k&rdotb;t&amacr; k&sdotb;atriy&amacr;&ndotb;&amacr;&mdota; na dharmo</hi>
    <l><hi>r&umacr;&ddotb;ha&mdota; sakhya&mdota; tad api ga&ndotb;ita&mdota; n&amacr;nujasy&amacr;rjunena</hi>
    <l><hi>tulya&hdotb; k&amacr;mam bhavatu bhavata&hdotb; çi&sdotb;yayo&hdotb; snehabandha&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>ko &apos;yam panth&amacr; yad asi vimukho mandabh&amacr;gye mayi tvam?</hi>
</lg>

<pb n=219 id=pb219 facs="f:219"><p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Thou hast forgotten the love due to kindred blood, thou hast violated the law of the warrior, thou hast ignored the deep friendship between thy younger brother and Arjuna. Granted that thy love for both thy pupils may be equal, nevertheless what is the cause that thou dost show hostility to me in my misfortune?&rsquo;

<p>These and many other passages are cited by the writers on poetics who find in the <hi>Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</hi> an inexhaustible mine of illustration of the theory which doubtless deeply affected the author in his composition. They do not, however, eulogize him blindly; the love scene with Bh&amacr;numat&imacr; is definitely treated as out of place.<note n=1 id=n219.1>SD. 408. Lévi, however, is in error (TI. i. 35, 224) in suggesting that SD. 406 censures as inappropriate Duryodhana and Kar&ndotb;a&apos;s dialogue in Act III.</note>


<div2 id=ch9.6 n=6>
<head><ab type=divNum>6.</ab> <hi>The Language and the Metres of the Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra.</hi></head>

<p>The Sanskrit and the Pr&amacr;krits offer no special features of interest. The latter is mainly in Çaurasen&imacr;, but the speeches of the R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa and his wife at the beginning of Act III are clearly in M&amacr;gadh&imacr;; they show the characteristic signs of <hi>e</hi> for the nominative singular, both masculine and neuter, of <hi>a</hi>-stems; <hi>l</hi> for <hi>r</hi>, and <hi>&amacr;</hi> in the vocative of <hi>a</hi>-stems. The suggestion of Grill<note n=2 id=n219.2>pp. 139, 140.</note> that the dialect is more precisely Ardha-M&amacr;gadh&imacr; is not necessary, for the points enumerated&mdash;the presence of <hi>s</hi> beside <hi>ç</hi>, the variation of <hi>o</hi> and <hi>a&mdota;</hi> in the nominative for <hi>e</hi>, and the use of <hi>jj</hi> for <hi>ry</hi>, and not <hi>yy</hi>&mdash;can be explained readily by the error of the scribes or the mistakes of the author. The freedom with which those worthies acted is seen clearly enough in the fact that one representative of the Beng&amacr;l&imacr; as opposed to the Devan&amacr;gar&imacr; recension of the text has systematically rewritten the Pr&amacr;krit into Çaurasen&imacr;.

<p>The metrical treatment is noteworthy for the almost equal use of Vasantatilaka (39), Ç&amacr;rd&umacr;lavikr&imacr;&ddotb;ita (32), Çikhari&ndotb;&imacr; (35), and Sragdhar&amacr; (20). There are 53 Çlokas, and a few stanzas of M&amacr;lin&imacr;, Pu&sdotb;pit&amacr;gr&amacr;, Prahar&sdotb;i&ndotb;&imacr;, and one each of Aupacchandasika, Vait&amacr;l&imacr;ya, Indravajr&amacr;, and Drutavilambita, with 6 &Amacr;ry&amacr;s, and 2 Pr&amacr;krit Vait&amacr;l&imacr;yas. The versification is thus decidedly of the later type.







<pb n=220 id=pb220 facs="f:220">
<div1 id=ch10 n=X>
<head type=label>X</head>

<head>MUR&Amacr;RI, R&Amacr;JAÇEKHARA, THEIR PREDECESSORS AND SUCCESSORS</head>


<div2 id=ch10.1 n=1>
<head><ab type=divNum>1.</ab> <hi>The Predecessors of Mur&amacr;ri</hi></head>

<p>We know definitely of very few dramatists of the eighth and ninth centuries. Kalha&ndotb;a<note n=1 id=n220.1>See Aufrecht, ZDMG. xxxvi. 521.</note> mentions expressly Yaçovarman of Kanyakubja as a patron of literature, who, as we have seen, patronized Bhavabh&umacr;ti and V&amacr;kpati, and we learn of his drama <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;bhyudaya</hi>, which is mentioned by &Amacr;nandavardhana in the <hi>Dhvany&amacr;loka</hi>, by Dhanika and Viçvan&amacr;tha, but has not yet been found. To Kalha&ndotb;a<note n=2 id=n220.2>v. 36; Lévi, TI. ii. 87. The citations are mainly from his <hi>Kapphi&ndotb;&amacr;bhyudaya</hi>; Thomas, <hi>Kav&imacr;ndravacanasamuccaya</hi>, p. 111.</note> also we are indebted for knowledge of the period of Çivasv&amacr;min, who lived under Avantivarman of Kashmir (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 855&ndash;83) and was a contemporary of the poet Ratn&amacr;kara. He wrote many N&amacr;&tdotb;akas and N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;s, and also Prakara&ndotb;as, but save an occasional verse in the anthologies his fame is lost.

<p>Ana&nmacr;gahar&sdotb;a M&amacr;trar&amacr;ja,<note n=3 id=n220.3>Pischel, ZDMG. xxxix. 315; Hultzsch, GN. 1886, pp. 224 ff.</note> on the other hand, is known to &Amacr;nandavardhana and Abhinavagupta, and his play <hi>T&amacr;pasavatsar&amacr;jacarita</hi> is a variation on the theme of the ruse of Yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a to secure the marriage of Vatsa and Padm&amacr;vat&imacr;, in face of the deep love of the king for V&amacr;savadatt&amacr;. Vatsa in this drama, which is of little poetic or dramatic value, becomes an ascetic on learning of his queen&apos;s supposed fate, whence the title of the play. Padm&amacr;vat&imacr;, who had become enamoured of the king from a portrait sent by the minister, follows suit. Eventually V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; and Vatsa are united in Pray&amacr;ga when each is about to commit suicide in sorrow at separation, and the usual victory is reported by Ruma&ndotb;vant to give a happy ending. <pb n=221 id=pb221 facs="f:221">There seems little doubt that the author used the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, which gives the upper limit of his date. His father&apos;s name is given <corr sic=at>as</corr> Narendravardhana.

<p>M&amacr;yur&amacr;j&amacr;<note n=1 id=n221.1>Bhattanatha Svamin, IA. xli. 139 f.; Bhandarkar, <hi>Report</hi> (1897), pp. xi, xviii; Peterson, <hi>Report</hi>, ii. 59. The name is variously given as M&amacr;y&umacr;r&amacr;ja.</note> has been less fortunate in that his <hi>Ud&amacr;ttar&amacr;ghava</hi> is known only by reference. R&amacr;jaçekhara represents him as a Karaculi or Kulicuri, which suggests the possibility that he was a king of the Kalacuri dynasty, of which unhappily we know little during the period in which he is probably to be set. He seems to have known Bhavabh&umacr;ti. Like him he eliminated treachery from the slaying of V&amacr;lin by R&amacr;ma, and he represents Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a as first to follow the magic gazelle, and R&amacr;ma as going later in pursuit. He is cited more than once in Dhanika&apos;s commentary on the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi>.

<p>No other dramatist of this period is known with any certainty; the <hi>P&amacr;rvat&imacr;pari&ndotb;aya</hi> once ascribed to B&amacr;&ndotb;a is now allotted to V&amacr;mana Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a B&amacr;&ndotb;a (<hi>c.</hi> <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1400), and the <hi>Mallik&amacr;m&amacr;ruta</hi>, wrongly thought to be Da&ndotb;&ddotb;in&apos;s, is the work of one Udda&ndotb;&ddotb;in of the seventeenth century.

<p>Of these dramatists Yaçovarman has had the honour of being considered worthy of quotation by the writers on theory who have preserved for us some interesting verses:<note n=2 id=n221.2><hi>Subh&amacr;&sdotb;it&amacr;vali</hi>, 1766.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>&amacr;krand&amacr;&hdotb; stanitair vilocanajal&amacr;ny açr&amacr;ntadh&amacr;r&amacr;mbhubhis</hi>
    <l><hi>tvadvicchedabhuvaç ca çokaçikhinas tuly&amacr;s ta&ddotb;idvibhramai&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>antar me dayit&amacr;mukha&mdota; tava çaç&imacr; v&rdotb;tti&hdotb; sam&amacr;py &amacr;vayo&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>tat kim m&amacr;m aniça&mdota; sakhe jaladhara dagdhum evodyata&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;My moans are like thy thunder, the floods of my tears thy ever-streaming showers, the flame of my sorrow at severance from my beloved thy flickering lightning, in my mind is her face reflected, in thee the moon; like is our condition; why then, O friend, O cloud, dost thou ever seek to consume me with the burning pangs of love?&rsquo;

<p>This is decidedly pretty, and there is elegance and beauty in another verse:<note n=3 id=n221.3><hi>Ibid.</hi>, 1366.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>yat tvannetrasam&amacr;nak&amacr;nti salile magna&mdota; tad ind&imacr;varam</hi>
    <l><hi>meghair antarita&hdotb; priye tava mukhacch&amacr;y&amacr;nuk&amacr;ra&hdotb; çaç&imacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>ye &apos;pi tvadgaman&amacr;nuk&amacr;ragatayas te r&amacr;jaha&ndota;s&amacr; gat&amacr;s</hi>
    <l><hi>tvats&amacr;d&rdotb;çyavinodam&amacr;tram api me daivena na k&sdotb;amyate.</hi>
</lg>

<pb n=222 id=pb222 facs="f:222"><p rend=noindent>&lsquo;The blue lotus which rivalled thine eyes in beauty is now sunk in the lake; the moon which imitated the fairness of thy face, beloved, is hidden by the clouds; the royal swans which aped thy lovely gait are departed; cruel fate will not grant me even the consolation of thy similitude.&rsquo;

<p>This verse is appropriated by the <hi>Mah&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, and so is the following,<note n=1 id=n222.1><hi>Ibid.</hi>, 1364.</note> which deals elegantly enough with the commonplace contrast between the sad lover and the Açoka tree, whose name is interpreted as &lsquo;sorrowless&rsquo;, and which flowers, as the poets never weary in telling us, when touched by the foot of a fair lady<corr>,</corr> especially one young:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>raktas tva&mdota; navapallavair aham api çl&amacr;ghyai&hdotb; priy&amacr;y&amacr; gu&ndotb;ais</hi>
    <l><hi>tv&amacr;m &amacr;y&amacr;nti çil&imacr;mukh&amacr;&hdotb; smaradhanurmukt&amacr;&hdotb; sakhe m&amacr;m api</hi>
    <l><hi>k&amacr;ntap&amacr;datal&amacr;hatis tava mude tad api mam&amacr;vayo&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>sarva&mdota; tulyam açoka kevalam aha&mdota; dh&amacr;tr&amacr; saçoka&hdotb; k&rdotb;ta&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Thou are proud in thy new shoots, I in the glorious excellences of my beloved; the bees resort to thee, to me the arrows shot from love&apos;s bow; like me thou dost delight in the touch of thy dear one&apos;s foot; all is alike for us both save only that, O tree Sorrowless, the creator hath made me a man of sorrows.&rsquo;

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>k&amacr;mavy&amacr;dhaçar&amacr;hatir na ga&ndotb;it&amacr; sa&mdota;j&imacr;van&imacr; tva&mdota; sm&rdotb;t&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>no dagdho virah&amacr;nalena jha&tdotb;iti tvatsa&mdota;gam&amacr;ç&amacr;m&rdotb;tai&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>n&imacr;to &apos;ya&mdota; divaso vicitralikhitai&hdotb; sa&mdota;kalpar&umacr;pair may&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>ki&mdota; v&amacr;nyad dh&rdotb;daye sthit&amacr;si nanu me tatra svaya&mdota; s&amacr;k&sdotb;i&ndotb;&imacr;.</hi><note n=2 id=n222.2><hi>Ibid.</hi>, 1634.</note>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;I have not recked of the wound given by love, the hunter, for the memory of thee hath been my elixir; the fire of separation hath not consumed me straightway because of the nectar of the hope of union with thee; all this day hath been spent by me in limning thy fancied form; nought else have I done, as thou thyself art witness, for dost thou not live in my heart?&rsquo; We may regret the loss of a work which contained verses as pretty as these, even on the outworn topic of R&amacr;ma and S&imacr;t&amacr;.

<p>It might be interesting to know whether Yaçovarman was successful in introducing any new element into the established plot. The play is cited in the commentary on the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi><note n=3 id=n222.3>i. 42; SD. 390; N. xix. 94; Lévi, TI. ii. 9.</note> to illustrate the device called deception or humiliation (<hi>chalana</hi>) and the parallel cited is that of the treatment of V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; in the <pb n=223 id=pb223 facs="f:223"><hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>. The definitions of the theory leave this idea far from clear; Viçvan&amacr;tha seems to treat it as the bearing of insult for the sake of the end to be reached, and the allusion in the case of S&imacr;t&amacr; may be to her abandonment by R&amacr;ma as an act of duty.

<p>A much less favourable impression is left by the few fragments of the <hi>Ud&amacr;ttar&amacr;ghava</hi> which are preserved. The poet seems to have affected the horrible, as two of his few stanzas deal with it; the better is:<note n=1 id=n223.1>DR. ii. 54 comm.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>j&imacr;yante jayino &apos;pi s&amacr;ndratimiravr&amacr;tair viyadvy&amacr;pibhir</hi>
    <l><hi>bh&amacr;svanta&hdotb; sakal&amacr; raver api ruca&hdotb; kasm&amacr;d akasm&amacr;d am&imacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>et&amacr;ç cograkabandharandhrarudhirair &amacr;dhm&amacr;yam&amacr;nodar&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>muñcanty &amacr;nanakandar&amacr;nalamucas t&imacr;vr&amacr; rav&amacr;&hdotb; pherav&amacr;&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;The victors are vanquished; thick darkness invades the sky and triumphs over the brilliant rays of the sun; why this inexplicable event? Why do these jackals, whose bellies are swollen with the blood sucked from the wounds of bleeding corpses, and whose gaping jaws belch flame, utter these piercing cries?<corr>&rsquo;</corr>

<p>A somewhat flat passage illustrates the conflict of thought in R&amacr;ma&apos;s mind when appealed to by Citram&amacr;ya on the score that Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a is in danger from a R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa:<note n=2 id=n223.2>DR. iv. 26 comm.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>vatsasy&amacr;bhayav&amacr;ridhe&hdotb; pratibhayam manye katha&mdota; r&amacr;k&sdotb;as&amacr;t</hi>
    <l><hi>trastaç cai&sdotb;a munir virauti manasaç c&amacr;sty eva me sambhrama&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>m&amacr; h&amacr;s&imacr;r Janak&amacr;tmaj&amacr;m iti muhu&hdotb; sneh&amacr;d gurur y&amacr;cate</hi>
    <l><hi>na sth&amacr;tu&mdota; na ca gantum &amacr;kulamater m&umacr;&ddotb;hasya me niçcaya&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;The boy is an ocean of valour; how can I fear danger for him from a R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa? Yet the sage here is terrified and calls for aid, and my own mind is confused; my master too in his affection ever begs me not to leave Janaka&apos;s daughter alone; my heart is troubled, and in my confusion I cannot resolve either to go or to stay.&rsquo;

<p>Another R&amacr;ma drama, the <hi>Chalitar&amacr;ma</hi>, is also referred to by Dhanika in his comment on the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi>; it may belong to this period, or fall somewhat later; we have from it a picture of the leading captive of Lava:<note n=3 id=n223.3>DR. i. 41 comm.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>yen&amacr;v&rdotb;tya mukh&amacr;ni s&amacr;ma pa&tdotb;hat&amacr;m atyantam &amacr;y&amacr;sitam</hi>
    <l><hi>b&amacr;lye yena h&rdotb;t&amacr;k&sdotb;as&umacr;travalayapratyarpa&ndotb;ai&hdotb; kr&imacr;&ddotb;itam</hi>
    <l><hi>yu&sdotb;m&amacr;ka&mdota; h&rdotb;daya&mdota; sa e&sdotb;a viçikhair &amacr;p&umacr;rit&amacr;&ndota;sasthalo</hi>
    <l><hi>m&umacr;rch&amacr;ghoratamaspraveçavivaço baddhv&amacr; Lavo n&imacr;yate.</hi>
</lg>

<pb n=224 id=pb224 facs="f:224"><p rend=noindent>&lsquo;He who caused such trouble to the S&amacr;man reciters turning to look at him in his childish play, who amused himself by stealing and giving back strings of beads and bracelets, he, your heart&apos;s joy, his shoulder pierced by arrows, powerless through entry into the dread darkness of fainting, is being led away bound, even Lava.&rsquo;

<p>Another stanza refers to Bharata; R&amacr;ma returning to Ayodhy&amacr; in the celestial chariot declines thus to enter the town, since it is not his, but under the rule of Bharata; scarcely has he descended when he sees before him his brother:<note n=1 id=n224.1>DR. iii. 13 comm.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>ko &apos;pi si&ndota;h&amacr;sanasy&amacr;dha&hdotb; sthita&hdotb; p&amacr;dukayo&hdotb; pura&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>ja&tdotb;&amacr;v&amacr;n ak&sdotb;am&amacr;l&imacr; ca c&amacr;mar&imacr; ca vir&amacr;jate.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;There stands some one, below the lion throne, before a pair of sandals, wearing his hair long, bearing a rosary, resplendent beneath the chowrie.&rsquo;

<p>The same play<note n=2 id=n224.2>DR. iii. 17 comm.</note> contains an amusing slip by S&imacr;t&amacr; where she bids her boys go to Ayodhy&amacr; and tender their respects to the king. Lava naturally replies by asking why they should become members of the king&apos;s entourage, and S&imacr;t&amacr; answers because the king is their father, a slip which she explains away as well as she can by saying that the king is father of the whole earth.

<p>Yet another drama of which we know nothing else is revealed to us by Dhanika, the <hi>P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;av&amacr;nanda</hi>, from which is cited a stanza interesting in its series of questions and answers, a literary form of which the dramatists are fond:<note n=3 id=n224.3>DR. iii. 12 comm.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>k&amacr; çl&amacr;ghy&amacr; gu&ndotb;in&amacr;&mdota; k&sdotb;am&amacr; paribhava&hdotb; ko ya&hdotb; svakulyai&hdotb; k&rdotb;ta&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>ki&mdota; du&hdotb;kha&mdota; parasa&mdota;çrayo jagati ka&hdotb; çl&amacr;ghyo ya &amacr;çr&imacr;yate</hi>
    <l><hi>ko m&rdotb;tyur vyasana&mdota; çuca&mdota; jahati ke yair nirjit&amacr;&hdotb; çatrava&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>kair vijñ&amacr;tam ida&mdota; Vir&amacr;&tdotb;anagare channasthitai&hdotb; P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;avai&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;For the good what is there praiseworthy? Patience. What is disgrace? That which is wrought by those of one&apos;s own blood. What is misery? Recourse to another&apos;s protection. Who in the world is enviable? He to whom one resorts for aid. What is death? Misfortune. Who escape sorrow? Those who conquer their foes. Who learned this lesson? The P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;avas when they dwelt in concealment in the city of Vir&amacr;&tdotb;a.&rsquo;

<p>We learn also from Dhanika of two further dramas, of unknown <pb n=225 id=pb225 facs="f:225">authorship and date; they are mentioned<note n=1 id=n225.1>DR. iii. 38 comm.; SD. 512.</note> as illustrating the two kinds of Prakara&ndotb;a as a dramatic form, the basis of distinction being whether the heroine is the wife of the hero and therefore a lady of good family or whether she is a courtesan. Of the latter class we have an example in the <hi>Tara&nmacr;gadatta</hi>, and of the former in the <hi>Pu&sdotb;pad&umacr;&sdotb;itaka</hi>; the latter name occurs in the slightly altered form of Pu&sdotb;pabh&umacr;&sdotb;ita in the <hi>S&amacr;hityadarpa&ndotb;a</hi>. As an example of the Samavak&amacr;ra the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi><note n=2 id=n225.2>DR. iii. 56 f. comm.; SD. 516.</note> mentions the <hi>Samudramanthana</hi>, a title doubtless as well as the description of the drama in question.


<div2 id=ch10.2 n=2>
<head><ab type=divNum>2.</ab> <hi>Mur&amacr;ri</hi></head>

<p>Mur&amacr;ri tells us that he was the son of Çr&imacr;vardham&amacr;naka of the Maudgalya Gotra and of Tantumat&imacr;; he claims to be a Mah&amacr;kavi, and arrogates the style of B&amacr;la-V&amacr;lm&imacr;ki. His date is uncertain; he is certainly later than Bhavabh&umacr;ti since he cites from the <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi>,<note n=3 id=n225.3>vi. 30/31 is cited in i. 6/7.</note> while we have evidence from the anthologies that he was reckoned by some as superior to Bhavabh&umacr;ti, apparently his predecessor. A further suggestion as to date may be derived from the Kashmirian poet Ratn&amacr;kara,<note n=4 id=n225.4>xxxviii. 68. For his date cf. Bühler, <hi>Kashmir Report</hi>, p. 42. See Bhattanatha Svamin, IA. xli. 141; Lévi, TI. i. 277.</note> who in his <hi>Haravijaya</hi> makes a clear reference to Mur&amacr;ri as a dramatist, for the effort of Bhattanatha Svamin to disprove the reference must be deemed completely unsuccessful. As Ratn&amacr;kara belongs to the middle of the ninth century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi>, this gives us that period as the latest date for Mur&amacr;ri. Curiously enough, Professor Konow,<note n=5 id=n225.5>ID. p. 83. Dhanika (DR. ii. 1) cites, anonymously as usual, iii. 21.</note> who accepts the disproof of the reference to Mur&amacr;ri in Ratn&amacr;kara, admits that the reference to Mur&amacr;ri in Ma&nmacr;kha&apos;s <hi>Çr&imacr;ka&ndotb;&tdotb;hacarita</hi><note n=6 id=n225.6>xxv. 74.</note> (<hi>c.</hi> <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1135) suggests that he was regarded by that author as earlier than R&amacr;jaçekhara, a fact which accords excellently with his priority to Ratn&amacr;kara, and is far more important than the fact that he is not cited by the authors on theory of the eleventh century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> A further effort to place him late is that of Dr. Hultzsch,<note n=7 id=n225.7>ZDMG. lxxv. 63.</note> who infers from verse 3 of the <hi>Kaumud&imacr;mitr&amacr;&ndotb;anda</hi> of R&amacr;macandra, pupil of Hemacandra, that that <pb n=226 id=pb226 facs="f:226">dramatist was a contemporary of Mur&amacr;ri. But the evidence is clearly inadequate; the words used are perfectly compatible with the fact that Mur&amacr;ri was dead, and there are grave chronological difficulties in the way of the theory. It is practically impossible that a contemporary of R&amacr;macandra could have been cited by Ma&nmacr;kha at the date of the <hi>Çr&imacr;ka&ndotb;&tdotb;hacarita</hi>. Moreover Mur&amacr;ri seems to have been imitated by Jayadeva in the <hi>Prasannar&amacr;ghava</hi>.<note n=1 id=n226.1>ii. 34, as compared with vii. 83.</note>

<p>Of his place of activity we know nothing definite. He mentions, however, M&amacr;hi&sdotb;mat&imacr; as the seat of the Kalacuris, and it has been suggested that this indicates that he lived under the patronage of a prince of that dynasty at M&amacr;hi&sdotb;mat&imacr;, now M&amacr;ndh&amacr;t&amacr; on the Narmad&amacr;.


<div2 id=ch10.3 n=3>
<head><ab type=divNum>3.</ab> <hi>The Anarghar&amacr;ghava</hi></head>

<p>Mur&amacr;ri declares in the prologue to the solitary drama, the <hi>Anarghar&amacr;ghava</hi><note n=2 id=n226.2>Ed. KM. 1894; cf. Baumgartner, <hi lang=de>Das Râmâya&ndotb;a</hi>, pp. 125 ff.</note> which has come down to us, though quotations show that he wrote other works, that his aim is to please a public tired of terror, horror, violence, and marvels, by a composition elevated, heroic, and marvellous throughout, not merely at the close. He defends his choice of the banal subject of R&amacr;ma; his character adds elevation and charm to the poet&apos;s work, and it would be folly to lay aside so splendid a theme. The <hi>Anarghar&amacr;ghava</hi>, however, does little to justify the poet&apos;s confidence in his choice of topic. The theme, treated already at length by Bhavabh&umacr;ti, offered no chance of success save for a great poet, and Mur&amacr;ri was not such a poet save in the estimate of occasional later writers who extol his depth (<hi>gambh&imacr;rat&amacr;</hi>) without any shadow of justification.

<p>Act I shows us Daçaratha in conversation with V&amacr;madeva. The arrival of the sage Viçv&amacr;mitra is announced; he exchanges with the king hyperbolic compliments of the most tedious type, but proceeds to business by demanding the aid of R&amacr;ma against the R&amacr;k&sdotb;asas which are troubling his hermitage. The king hesitates to send one so young and dear into danger. The sage insists on his obeying the call of duty, and he hands over R&amacr;ma and Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a to the care of the ascetic. The herald announces <pb n=227 id=pb227 facs="f:227">midday, and the king mourns the loss of his son. In Act II we have first a long-drawn-out conversation between Çuna&hdotb;çepha and Paçume&ddotb;hra, two pupils of Viçv&amacr;mitra, which serves to enlighten us on the history of V&amacr;lin, R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, the R&amacr;k&sdotb;asas, J&amacr;mbavant, Hanumant, and T&amacr;&ddotb;ak&amacr;. The entr&apos;acte is followed by the appearance of R&amacr;ma and Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a who describe the hermitage and the doings of its occupants, and then the heat of midday. Time, however, does not trouble the dramatist; though there is no further action and no interruption in the dialogue, we find ourselves transported to the evening; Viçv&amacr;mitra enters and describes in converse with the boys the sunset. A cry behind the scene announces the approach of the demoness T&amacr;&ddotb;ak&amacr;; R&amacr;ma hesitates to slay a female, but finally departs for the necessary duty; on his return he has to describe the rising of the moon. Viçv&amacr;mitra then suggests a visit to Janaka of Mithil&amacr;, affording an opportunity for a description of the city and its ruler.

<p>In Act II only do we reach the motif which Bhavabh&umacr;ti with far greater skill made the leading idea of the drama, thus giving it effective unity, so far as the story permits. The chamberlain of Janaka in conversation with Kalaha&ndota;sik&amacr;, one of S&imacr;t&amacr;&apos;s suite, lets us know that the princess is now ripe for marriage, and R&amacr;va&ndotb;a seeks her hand. In the scene that follows the king accompanied by Çat&amacr;nanda receives R&amacr;ma, but hesitates to put him to the severe test involved in bending Çiva&apos;s bow. Çau&sdotb;kala, R&amacr;va&ndotb;a&apos;s envoy, arrives to demand the maiden&apos;s hand, but indignantly declines the request that his master should bend the bow. He eulogizes R&amacr;va&ndotb;a whom R&amacr;ma depreciates. R&amacr;ma is at last allowed to make the trial; those who remain on the stage describe his wonderful deed in breaking the bow. He is promised S&imacr;t&amacr;&apos;s hand, while the other sons of Daçaratha are also awarded consorts. Çau&sdotb;kala departs, menacing revenge. Act IV shows us R&amacr;va&ndotb;a&apos;s minister M&amacr;lyavant lamenting the failure of his scheme to win S&imacr;t&amacr;. Ç&umacr;rpa&ndotb;akh&amacr; arrives from Videha and tells of the union of R&amacr;ma and S&imacr;t&amacr;. M&amacr;lyavant recognizes that R&amacr;va&ndotb;a will insist on seeking to separate the pair, and he counsels Ç&umacr;rpa&ndotb;akh&amacr; to assume the disguise of Manthar&amacr;, the maid of Kaikey&imacr;, with the view of securing the banishment of R&amacr;ma to the forest, where he will be more vulnerable to attack. <pb n=228 id=pb228 facs="f:228">He is also cheered by the news given by Ç&umacr;rpa&ndotb;akh&amacr; of the approach of Paraçur&amacr;ma to Mithil&amacr;, whence some gain may accrue to his cause. The following scene shows us R&amacr;ma and Paraçur&amacr;ma in verbal contest; R&amacr;ma is even more polite than in the <hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi> which is obviously imitated, while the friends of R&amacr;ma carry on a vituperative dialogue behind the scene without actually appearing. Finally they resolve to fight, for R&amacr;ma has annoyed his rival by reminding him that the flag of his fame won by his destruction of the K&sdotb;atriyas is worn out and challenging him to mount a new one. The fight itself takes place off the stage; S&imacr;t&amacr;, we learn from a voice behind the scenes, is apprehensive lest R&amacr;ma be drawing again his bow to win another maiden. The rivals then appear on excellent terms; Paraçur&amacr;ma exchanges farewells with his former interlocutors and disappears. Then enter Janaka and Daçaratha. The latter is determined to resign his kingdom to R&amacr;ma, but Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a enters introducing Manthar&amacr; who bears a fatal missive from Kaikey&imacr;, bidding the king grant the two boons of the banishment of R&amacr;ma and the coronation of Bharata. The kings faint; R&amacr;ma sends Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a to tell S&imacr;t&amacr;, and commends his father to Janaka.

<p>In Act V a conversation between J&amacr;mbavant and an ascetic lady, Çrava&ndotb;&amacr;, tells of the doings of R&amacr;ma until his advent in the forest. Çrava&ndotb;&amacr; goes to Sugr&imacr;va to bespeak a kindly welcome for the wayfarers, while J&amacr;mbavant overhears a dialogue between R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, disguised as a juggler, and Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a. The vulture Ja&tdotb;&amacr;yu then appears with the grave news that he has seen R&amacr;va&ndotb;a and M&amacr;r&imacr;ca in the forest; J&amacr;mbavant goes to warn Sugr&imacr;va of the danger, while Ja&tdotb;&amacr;yu sees the rape of S&imacr;t&amacr; and pursues the ravisher. After this entr&apos;acte R&amacr;ma and Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a enter, wandering in grief in vain search. They are interrupted by a cry and see the friendly forest chief, Guha, assailed by the headless Kabandha. Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a rescues him, but, in doing so, knocks off the tree, on which it was suspended, the skeleton of Dundubhi, to the annoyance of V&amacr;lin, who appears, and after a lengthy conversation challenges R&amacr;ma to battle. The fight is described from the stage by Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a and Guha; the enemy is slain. Voices from behind the scenes report the coronation of Sugr&imacr;va and his determination to aid R&amacr;ma in the recovery of <pb n=229 id=pb229 facs="f:229">S&imacr;t&amacr;, and Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a and his friend leave the stage to rejoin their party. In Act VI S&amacr;ra&ndotb;a and Çuka, two spies of R&amacr;va&ndotb;a&apos;s describe to M&amacr;lyavant the building of the bridge over the ocean and the advent of R&amacr;ma&apos;s army. Voices from behind announce the departure of Kumbhakar&ndotb;a and Meghan&amacr;da for battle; in the same way we learn of their fall and the last exit of R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, whom M&amacr;lyavant decides to follow to the field. The final struggle is described with tedious and tasteless prolixity by two Vidy&amacr;dharas, Ratnac&umacr;&ddotb;a and Hem&amacr;&nmacr;gada, and with this the Act closes.

<p>In Act VII we have a determined effort to vie with the close of the <hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi>. R&amacr;ma, S&imacr;t&amacr;, Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a, Vibh&imacr;&sdotb;a&ndotb;a, and Sugr&imacr;va proceed in Kubera&apos;s celestial car to Ayodhy&amacr;. But the route is diversified from the simplicity of the model, for the travellers are taken to the celestial regions to view in all its aspects the mythical mountain Sumeru and the world of the moon; only then do they commence their journey in its terrestrial aspect by a description of Si&ndota;hala, distinguished as usual from La&nmacr;k&amacr;; the route then passes over the Malaya mountains, the forest, the mountain Prasrava&ndotb;a, the God&amacr;var&imacr;, mount M&amacr;lyavant, Ku&ndotb;&ddotb;in&imacr;pura in the Mah&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;ra country, K&amacr;ñc&imacr;, Ujjayin&imacr;, M&amacr;hi&sdotb;mat&imacr;, the Yamun&amacr;, the Ganges, V&amacr;r&amacr;&ndotb;as&imacr;, Mithil&amacr; and Camp&amacr;; the car goes then west to Pray&amacr;ga, and later turns east to Ayodhy&amacr;, where the priest Vasi&sdotb;&tdotb;ha waits with R&amacr;ma&apos;s brothers to crown him king.

<p>The demerits of the poem are obvious; there is no attempt to improve on the traditional narrative, though V&amacr;lin is honourably killed; the characters are as stereotyped as ever. The author, however, delights to overload and elaborate the theme; hyperbole marks every idea; his mythological knowledge is adequate to enable him to abound in conceits and plays on words, when he does not sink, as largely in Act III, to mere commonplace. The taste which invents the visit to the world of the moon and Sumeru is as deplorable as that which substitutes the dull dialogue between J&amacr;mbavant and Ja&tdotb;&amacr;yu for the vigorous conversation of Ja&tdotb;&amacr;yu and Samp&amacr;ti in the <hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi>. For dialogue in general Mur&amacr;ri has no taste at all, and what merit his work has lies entirely in the ability which he shows to handle the Sanskrit language and to frame sentences of harmonious <pb n=230 id=pb230 facs="f:230">sound in effective metrical forms. His knowledge of the lexica is obvious, while his love of the recondite in grammar has won him the fame of being used to illustrate rare forms by the author of the <hi>Siddh&amacr;ntakaumud&imacr;</hi>. These linguistic merits have secured him the preference shown for him by modern taste. Nor indeed can his power of expression be justly denied:<note n=1 id=n230.1>v. 6.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>d&rdotb;çyante madhumattakokilavadh&umacr;nirdh&umacr;tac&umacr;t&amacr;&nmacr;kura&mdash;</hi>
    <l><hi>pr&amacr;gbh&amacr;raprasaratpar&amacr;gasikat&amacr;durg&amacr;s ta&tdotb;&imacr;bh&umacr;maya&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>y&amacr;&hdotb; k&rdotb;cchr&amacr;d atila&nmacr;ghya lubdhakabhay&amacr;t tair eva re&ndotb;&umacr;tkarair</hi>
    <l><hi>dh&amacr;r&amacr;v&amacr;hibhir asti luptapadav&imacr;ni&hdotb;ça&nmacr;kam e&ndotb;&imacr;kulam.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent><corr>&lsquo;</corr>There are seen the towering slopes as of sand where the pollen tilts off from the mango shoots, shaken by the female cuckoos, maddened by the intoxication of spring; scarce can the antelopes in their fear of the hunter leap over them, but the dust which they raise in showers accords them security by concealing the path of their flight.&rsquo; The idea is certainly trivial enough, but the expression, which defies reproduction in English, is in its own way a masterpiece of effect.

<p>A pretty erotic verse is found in Act VII:<note n=2 id=n230.2>vii. 87.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>anena rambhoru bhavanmukhena: tu&sdotb;&amacr;rabh&amacr;nos tulay&amacr; dh&rdotb;tasya</hi>
    <l><hi>&umacr;nasya n&umacr;nam pratip&umacr;ra&ndotb;&amacr;ya: t&amacr;r&amacr; sphuranti pratim&amacr;nakha&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;h.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;When the moon is placed in the scales, fair-limbed one, against thy face, assuredly it is found wanting, and to make good the deficit the stars must shine as make-weights.&rsquo;

<p>Not a bad example of more elaborate, yet graceful, eulogy is found in the following stanza:<note n=3 id=n230.3>vii. 82.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>gotre s&amacr;k&sdotb;&amacr;d ajani bhagav&amacr;n e&sdotb;a yat padmayoni&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>çayyotth&amacr;ya&mdota; yad akhilam aha&hdotb; pr&imacr;&ndotb;ayanti dvireph&amacr;n</hi>
    <l><hi>ek&amacr;gr&amacr;&mdota; yad dadhati bhagavaty u&sdotb;&ndotb;abh&amacr;nau ca bhaktim</hi>
    <l><hi>tat pr&amacr;pus te sutanu vadanaupamyam ambhoruh&amacr;&ndotb;i.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Since manifestly in their family has been born the blessed one, sprung from the lotus; since all day long they delight the bees as they rise from their bed; since their whole faith they devote to the blessed lord of the sharp rays, thus, O lovely one, the flowers that spring from the water attain the likeness of thy face.&rsquo;

<pb n=231 id=pb231 facs="f:231"><p>Happy also is another erotic stanza:<note n=1 id=n231.1>vii. 107.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>abhimukhapatay&amacr;lubhir lal&amacr;&tdotb;a&mdash;: çramasalilair avadh&umacr;tapattralekha&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>kathayati puru&sdotb;&amacr;yita&mdota; vadh&umacr;n&amacr;m: m&rdotb;ditahimadyutidurman&amacr;&hdotb; kapola&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Its painted mark obliterated by the moisture which streams from the wearied brow over the face, the cheek reveals the longing of women, melancholy as the wan moon.&rsquo;

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>ude&sdotb;yatp&imacr;y&umacr;&sdotb;adyutirucika&ndotb;&amacr;rdr&amacr;&hdotb; çaçima&ndotb;i&mdash;</hi>
    <l><hi>sthal&imacr;n&amacr;m panth&amacr;no ghanacara&ndotb;al&amacr;k&sdotb;&amacr;lipibh&rdotb;ta&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>cakorair u&ddotb;&ddotb;&imacr;nair jha&tdotb;iti k&rdotb;taça&nmacr;k&amacr;&hdotb; pratipadam</hi>
    <l><hi>par&amacr;ca&hdotb; sa&mdota;c&amacr;r&amacr;n avinayavat&imacr;n&amacr;&mdota; viv&rdotb;&ndotb;ate.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Footprints on pavements of moonstone, marked with the lac that dyes deep the feet, wet with drops that have the radiance of rising cream, made with anxiety at every step as the Cakoras fly up disturbed, mark the departure of ladies who violate decorum.&rsquo;<note n=2 id=n231.2>vii. 90.</note>

<p>A further stanza in some manuscripts of the poem occurs in the drama, while elsewhere it seems to be treated as a verse about Mur&amacr;ri:<note n=3 id=n231.3>Ed. p. 1, note.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>dev&imacr;&mdota; v&amacr;cam up&amacr;sate hi bahava&hdotb; s&amacr;ra&mdota; tu s&amacr;rasvatam</hi>
    <l><hi>j&amacr;n&imacr;te nitar&amacr;m asau gurukulakli&sdotb;&tdotb;o Mur&amacr;ri&hdotb; kavi&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>abdhir la&nmacr;ghita eva v&amacr;narabha&tdotb;ai&hdotb; ki&mdota; tv asy&amacr; gambh&imacr;rat&amacr;m</hi>
    <l><hi>&amacr;p&amacr;t&amacr;lanimagnap&imacr;varatanur j&amacr;n&amacr;ti manth&amacr;cala&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Many serve the goddess speech, but the essence of eloquence Mur&amacr;ri alone knows to the full, that poet who long toiled in the house of his teacher; even so the monkey host leapt over the ocean, but its depth the Mount of Churning alone knows, for its mighty mass penetrated down even to the realms below.&rsquo;


<div2 id=ch10.4 n=4>
<head><ab type=divNum>4.</ab> <hi>The Date of R&amacr;jaçekhara</hi></head>

<p>R&amacr;jaçekhara, with the usual prolixity of bad poets, is voluble on his personality; he was of a Mah&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;ra K&sdotb;atriya family of the Y&amacr;y&amacr;varas, who claimed descent from R&amacr;ma; son of the minister Durduka or Duhika, and of Ç&imacr;lavat&imacr;; grandson of Ak&amacr;lajalada, and descendant of Sur&amacr;nanda, Tarala, and Kavir&amacr;ja, all <pb n=232 id=pb232 facs="f:232">poets of name. He married Avantisundar&imacr; of the C&amacr;ham&amacr;na family, and was a moderate Çaiva.<note n=1 id=n232.1>Konow, <hi>Karp&umacr;ramañjar&imacr;</hi>, pp. 177 ff.; Hultzsch, IA. xxxiv. 177 ff.; V. S. Apte, <hi>R&amacr;jaçekhara</hi>, Poona, 1886. Of special virtue is his <hi>K&amacr;vyam&imacr;m&amacr;&ndota;s&amacr;</hi> on rhetoric, which is better than his dramas.</note>

<p>In the <hi>Karp&umacr;ramañjar&imacr;</hi>, probably his first play since it was produced at the request of his wife, and not a king, he refers to himself as the teacher of Nirbhaya or Nirbhara, who was clearly the Pratih&amacr;ra king, Mahendrap&amacr;la of Mahodaya or Kanyakubja, of whom we have records in <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 893 and 907. The <hi>B&amacr;lar&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> was produced at his request. But he seems then to have visited another court, for the <hi>Viddhaç&amacr;labhañjik&amacr;</hi> was produced for the Kalacuri king, Yuvar&amacr;ja Key&umacr;ravar&sdotb;a of Tripur&imacr;. But, as the unfinished <hi>B&amacr;labh&amacr;rata</hi> was written for Mah&imacr;p&amacr;la, successor of <corr sic=Mahendrapala>Mahendrap&amacr;la</corr>, whose records begin in <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 914, we may assume that he returned to the court of the Pratih&amacr;ras and died there. In the <hi>B&amacr;lar&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> he speaks of six of his works, not apparently including the <hi>Viddhaç&amacr;labhañjik&amacr;</hi> and the <hi>B&amacr;labh&amacr;rata</hi>, and in fact we have many stanzas from him regarding famous authors, though of course the proof of derivation from this R&amacr;jaçekara is not always complete.

<p>The <hi>B&amacr;lar&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> shows to perfection R&amacr;jaçekhara&apos;s own estimate of himself. He traces his poetic descent from V&amacr;lm&imacr;ki, through Bhart&rdotb;me&ndotb;&tdotb;ha and Bhavabh&umacr;ti, but it is not clear that Bhart&rdotb;me&ndotb;&tdotb;ha must be assumed to have dramatized the work, and the little we know of this obscure person merely shows that he wrote an epic, the <hi>Hayagr&imacr;vavadha</hi>, while his date is involved in the problems of Vikram&amacr;ditya and M&amacr;t&rdotb;gupta.<note n=2 id=n232.2>Winternitz, GIL. iii. 47; Lévi, TI. i. 183 f.</note>


<div2 id=ch10.5 n=5>
<head><ab type=divNum>5.</ab> <hi>The Dramas of R&amacr;jaçekhara</hi></head>

<p>The <hi>B&amacr;lar&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi><note n=3 id=n232.3>Ed. Calcutta, 1884.</note> is a Mah&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka, that is one in ten acts, and the author, to add to the horror of the length, has expanded the prologue to almost the dimensions of an act, celebrating his non-existent merits, and has expanded each act to almost the dimensions of a N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;. The whole has 741 stanzas, and of these no less than 203 are in the 19-syllable <corr sic="Ç&amacr;rd&umacr;lavikr&imacr;dita">Ç&amacr;rd&umacr;lavikr&imacr;&ddotb;ita</corr> and 89 in the Sragdhar&amacr;, which has two more syllables in each pada or 84 in a stanza. The play has a certain novelty, because <pb n=233 id=pb233 facs="f:233">the author has made the love of R&amacr;va&ndotb;a the dominating feature. He appears in person in the first act, but declines to test himself by drawing Çiva&apos;s bow, and departs, menacing evil to any husband of S&imacr;t&amacr;. In Act II he seeks the aid of Paraçur&amacr;ma, but is insulted instead, and a battle barely prevented by intervention of friends. In Act III the marriage of S&imacr;t&amacr; is enacted before him to distract his amorous sorrow, but the attempt is as little a success as it deserved to be; he interrupts, and finally the scene has to be broken off. In Act IV the duel of R&amacr;ma and Paraçur&amacr;ma is disposed of, but in Act V we find another ludicrous effort to amuse R&amacr;va&ndotb;a; dolls with parrots in their mouths are presented to him as S&imacr;t&amacr; and his foster sister; he is deceived until he finds that his grasp is on wood; distracted, he demands his beloved from nature, the seasons, the streams, and the birds, as does Pur&umacr;ravas in the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>. The arrival of Ç&umacr;rpa&ndotb;akh&amacr;, his sister, who has suffered severely from her attack on R&amacr;ma, brings him to a condition of more manly rage. A tedious Act then carries matters down to the death of the sorrowing Daçaratha. In Act VII the problem of inducing the ocean to accept the burden of the bridge is solved; Dadhittha and Kapittha, two monkeys, describe at length its construction to R&amacr;ma. A momentary terror is caused by a stratagem of M&amacr;lyavant; the severed head of S&imacr;t&amacr; seems to be flung on the shore, but it speaks and reveals the fraud; it is the head of the speaking doll. In Act VIII we have R&amacr;va&ndotb;a&apos;s impressions as disaster after disaster is announced; he sends out Kumbhakar&ndotb;a, but sees even him helpless, despite his magic weapons, before R&amacr;ma. In Act IX Indra himself describes the last desperate duel of R&amacr;ma and R&amacr;va&ndotb;a. In Act X the party of R&amacr;ma makes the usual aerial tour of India, including the world of the moon, and ending with the inevitable consecration.

<p>The <hi>B&amacr;labh&amacr;rata</hi><note n=1 id=n233.1>Ed. C. Cappeller, Strassburg, 1885; Weber, IS. xviii. 481 ff.</note> is mercifully unfinished; it covers the marriage of Draupad&imacr;, and the gambling scene with the ill usage of Draupad&imacr;. The other two plays are really N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;s, but the first, the <hi>Karp&umacr;ramañjar&imacr;</hi><note n=2 id=n233.2>Ed. S. Konow, trs. C. R. Lanman, HOS. iv. 1901; J. Charpentier, <hi>Monde oriental</hi>, ii. 226 ff.</note> is classed by the theory as a Sa&tdotb;&tdotb;aka, simply because it is in Pr&amacr;krit, none of the characters <pb n=234 id=pb234 facs="f:234">speaking Sanskrit. It is the old story; here the king is Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;ap&amacr;la, possibly a compliment to Mahendrap&amacr;la, and his beloved the Kuntala princess, Karp&umacr;ramañjar&imacr;, who is really a cousin of the queen. In Act I a magician, Bhairav&amacr;nanda, displays the damsel to the king and queen; the apparition tells her tale, and the queen decides to add her to the number of her attendants. The king and the maiden fall at once in love. In Act II a letter from the maiden avows her passion, and the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka and her friend Vicak&sdotb;a&ndotb;&amacr; arrange to let the king see her swinging and also producing by her touch the blossoming of the Açoka. Between the Acts we must assume that the queen has found out the love, and has confined the maiden, while the king has secured the making of a subterranean passage giving access to her prison. In Act III by this means the princess and the king enjoy a flirtation in the garden, when the queen discovers them. In Act IV we find that the end of the passage giving on the garden has been blocked, but another passage has been made to the sanctuary of C&amacr;mu&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;, the entrance concealed behind the statue. Thus the prisoner can play a game of hide-and-seek with the queen, and this enables her to carry out a clever ruse invented by the magician to secure the queen&apos;s blessing for the wedding. The queen is induced to demand that the king shall marry a princess of L&amacr;&tdotb;a who will secure him imperial rank. She is still at her home, but the magician will fetch her to the place. The wedding goes on merrily, but the princess is no other than Karp&umacr;ramañjar&imacr;, and the queen has unwittingly accomplished the lovers&apos; desires.

<p>The same motif is repeated in the <hi>Viddhaç&amacr;labhañjik&amacr;</hi>,<note n=1 id=n234.1>Ed. Poona, 1886; trs. L. H. Gray, JAOS. xxvii. 1 ff.</note> which is a regular N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;. Act I tells us that Candravarman of L&amacr;&tdotb;a, vassal of Vidy&amacr;dharamalla, has sent to the court of his overlord his daughter M&rdotb;g&amacr;&nmacr;k&amacr;val&imacr; in the guise of his son and heir. The king, Vidy&amacr;dharamalla, recounts a dream in the truthful hours of the morning, in which a beautiful maid had cast a collar of pearls round his neck; he is haunted by her, and next finds her in sculptured form (<hi>ç&amacr;labhañjik&amacr;</hi>) in the picture gallery. He has a further glimpse of her in the flesh but no more, before the heralds announce midday. In Act II we learn that the queen proposes to marry Kuvalayam&amacr;l&amacr; of Kuntala to the pretended <pb n=235 id=pb235 facs="f:235">boy, while the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka has been promised by her foster-sister, Mekhal&amacr;, marriage with a lady of the seductive name of Ambaram&amacr;l&amacr;, Air Garland. Imagine his disgust when she turns out to be a mere slave; the king has to calm him, and together they watch in hiding M&rdotb;g&amacr;&nmacr;k&amacr;val&imacr; playing in the garden, and hear her reading a letter of love. The heralds proclaim the evening hour. In Act III we are told that the dream of the king was reality, devised by Bh&amacr;gur&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, his minister, who knew that the husband of the heroine would attain imperial rule. The Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka punishes Mekhal&amacr;&apos;s ruse by another; he bids a woman hide herself and call out a warning to Mekhal&amacr; of evil to befall her unless she crawl between a Brahmin&apos;s limbs. The queen begs the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka to permit this ceremony, and, it over, he avows the plot to the great indignation of the queen. The Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka and the king then have an interview with the heroine. In Act IV we learn of a plot of the queen to punish the king. She induces him to agree to marry the sister of the pretended boy, meaning that he should find that he has married a boy. The king agrees; the marriage is completed; news comes from Candravarman that a son is born, begging the queen to dispose in marriage of his daughter, who may resume her sex. The queen, tricked and deceived, makes the best of her situation; with dignity and hauteur she bestows on her husband both M&rdotb;g&amacr;&nmacr;k&amacr;val&imacr; and Kuvalayam&amacr;l&amacr;, while news is brought that the last rebels are subdued and the king&apos;s suzerainty is recognized everywhere.

<p>There can be no doubt of the demerits of R&amacr;jaçekhara&apos;s works; he is devoid of the power to create a character: Vidy&amacr;dharamalla is stiff and uninteresting beside his model, the gay and gallant Vatsa; the queen is without the love or the majesty of V&amacr;savadatt&amacr;; Bh&amacr;gur&amacr;ya&ndotb;a is a feeble Yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, whose magician is borrowed in the <hi>Karp&umacr;ramañjar&imacr;</hi> and spoiled in the borrowing. The heroines are without merit; the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka in the <hi>Karp&umacr;ramañjar&imacr;</hi> is tedious, but C&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a in the <hi>Viddhaç&amacr;labhañjik&amacr;</hi> has merits; he has plenty of sound common sense, though he is simple and capable of being taken in by others. The intrigue in both N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;s is poorly managed; the confusion of exits and entrances in the <hi>Karp&umacr;ramañjar&imacr;</hi> is difficult to follow and probably more difficult to act, while in the <hi>Viddhaç&amacr;labhañjik&amacr;</hi> the queen is induced to arrange a marriage out of a <pb n=236 id=pb236 facs="f:236">puerile incident affecting the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka only. The taste of giving two brides to the king at once is deplorable, as is the failure to explain why the king accepts the suggested marriage when ignorant of its true import.

<p>In all his dramas, however, R&amacr;jaçekhara is merely concerned with exercises in style. The themes he frankly tells us in the prologue to the <hi>Karp&umacr;ramañjar&imacr;</hi> are the same; the question is the expression, and the language is indifferent; therefore Pr&amacr;krit being smooth, while Sanskrit is harsh, the language of women as opposed to men, can be used as a medium of style by one who boasts himself an expert in every kind of language. We have, therefore, elaborate descriptions in equally elaborate verses, of the dawn, midday, sunset, the pleasures of the harem, the game of ball, the swing, a favourite enjoyment of the Indian maidens, and in the N&amacr;&tdotb;akas pictures <hi>ad nauseam</hi> of battles with magic weapons, and appalling mythical geography and topography. His allusions to local practices and customs may be interesting to the antiquarian, but are not poetical. More praiseworthy is his real accomplishment in metres, especially the Ç&amacr;rd&umacr;lavikr&imacr;&ddotb;ita, his facility in which K&sdotb;emendra justly praises, the Vasantatilaka, Çloka, and Sragdhar&amacr;. His ability to handle elaborate Pr&amacr;krit metres is undeniable; in 144 stanzas in the <hi>Karp&umacr;ramañjar&imacr;</hi> he has 17 varieties. If poetry consisted merely of harmonious sound, he must be ranked high as a poet. He is fond of proverbs: <hi>vara&mdota; takk&amacr;lova&ndotb;ad&amacr; tittir&imacr; &ndotb;a u&ndotb;a diahantarid&amacr; mor&imacr;</hi>, which gives our &lsquo;A bird in hand is worth two in the bush&rsquo;; he introduces freely words from vernaculars, including Mar&amacr;th&imacr;. But, despite his parade of learning, he cannot distinguish accurately Çaurasen&imacr; and M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr; in his drama; in the former we find such forms as <hi>la&tdotb;&tdotb;hi</hi> for <hi>ya&sdotb;&tdotb;i</hi>, <hi>ammi</hi> in the locative and <hi>hi&mdota;to</hi> in the ablative singular of <hi>a</hi>-stems, and <hi>esa</hi> for the pronoun. Important as he is lexicographically for both Sanskrit and Pr&amacr;krit, it is undeniable that both were utterly dead languages for him, which he had laboriously learned. Forms like <hi>&ddotb;hilla</hi> equivalent to <hi>çithila</hi> in the <hi>Karp&umacr;ramañjar&imacr;</hi> show how far the vernaculars had advanced beyond the Pr&amacr;krits of the drama.

<p>It would, however, be quite unjust to deny to R&amacr;jaçekhara the power of effective expression; like all the later dramatists he is capable of producing elegant and attractive verses, which are <pb n=237 id=pb237 facs="f:237">largely spoiled in their context by their being embedded in masses of tasteless matter. Thus the benediction of the <hi>Viddhaç&amacr;labhañjik&amacr;</hi> is decidedly graceful:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>kulagurur abal&amacr;n&amacr;&mdota; kelid&imacr;k&sdotb;&amacr;prad&amacr;ne</hi>
    <l><hi>paramasuh&rdotb;d ana&nmacr;go rohi&ndotb;&imacr;vallabhasya</hi>
    <l><hi>api kusumap&rdotb;&sdotb;atkair devadevasya jet&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>jayati suratal&imacr;l&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;s&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Family preceptor of young maidens for the bestowal of the sacrament of love, the bodyless one, dearest friend of Rohi&ndotb;&imacr;&apos;s lover, he that with his flower arrows overthrew the god of gods, he is victorious ever, the director of the comedy of the play of love&apos;s mysteries.&rsquo;

<p>The description of summer is also pretty if banal:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>rajaniviramay&amacr;me&sdotb;v &amacr;diçant&imacr; ratecch&amacr;m</hi>
    <l><hi>kim api ka&tdotb;hinayant&imacr; n&amacr;rikel&imacr;phal&amacr;mbha&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>api pari&ndotb;amayitr&imacr; r&amacr;jarambh&amacr;phal&amacr;n&amacr;m</hi>
    <l><hi>dinapari&ndotb;atiramy&amacr; vartate gr&imacr;&sdotb;malak&sdotb;m&imacr;&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;This is the glorious season of summer, delightful in the length of the days, when the royal plantain fruits are ripened, and the milk in the coco-nut is hardened, and the season bids us enjoy the delight of love in the closing watches of the night.&rsquo;

<p>The signs of a maiden distracted by unfulfilled affection are quaintly described:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>candra&mdota; candanakardamena likhita&mdota; s&amacr; m&amacr;r&sdotb;&tdotb;i da&sdotb;&tdotb;&amacr;dhar&amacr;</hi>
    <l><hi>bandhya&mdota; nindati yac ca manmatham asau bha&nmacr;ktv&amacr;grahast&amacr;&nmacr;gur&imacr;&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>k&amacr;ma&hdotb; pu&sdotb;paçara&hdotb; kileti sumanovarga&mdota; lun&imacr;te ca yat</hi>
    <l><hi>tat k&amacr;my&amacr; subhaga tvay&amacr; varatanur v&amacr;t&umacr;lat&amacr;&mdota; lambhit&amacr;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Biting her lip, she wipes out the figure of the moon sketched in sandal paste; snapping her finger-tips she mocks at love as barren; to flout his darts, the flowers she gathers she tears in shreds; assuredly the fair one whom thou shouldst love hath been brought by thee to madness.&rsquo;

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>antast&amacr;ra&mdota; taralitatal&amacr;&hdotb; stokam utp&imacr;&ddotb;abh&amacr;ja&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>pak&sdotb;m&amacr;gre&sdotb;u grathitap&rdotb;&sdotb;ata&hdotb; k&imacr;r&ndotb;adh&amacr;r&amacr;&hdotb; krame&ndotb;a</hi>
    <l><hi>citt&amacr;ta&nmacr;ka&mdota; nijagarimata&hdotb; samyag &amacr;s&umacr;trayanto</hi>
    <l><hi>niry&amacr;nty asy&amacr;&hdotb; kuvalayad&rdotb;ço b&amacr;&sdotb;pav&amacr;r&amacr;m prav&amacr;h&amacr;&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Rippled on the surface of the pupil, slightly foaming, forming drops on the tips of the lashes, then slowly issuing in streams, <pb n=238 id=pb238 facs="f:238">betokening by their weight her heart&apos;s sorrow, there pour forth from the lotus-eyed one the floods of her tears.&rsquo;

<p>Of all the plays the <hi>Karp&umacr;ramañjar&imacr;</hi> is undoubtedly that which contains the most substantial evidence that R&amacr;jaçekhara had some real poetic talent, despite the banality and stupidity of his conception of love in Act III. The swing scene contains really effective lines of word-painting, in harmonious metre:<note n=1 id=n238.1>ii. 30. The translation of this and the next verse is taken from Lanman&apos;s version.</note>

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>vicchaanto &ndotb;aararama&ndotb;&imacr;ma&ndotb;&ddotb;alass&amacr;&ndotb;a&ndotb;&amacr;i&mdota;</hi>
      <l rend="indent(2)"><hi>viccholanto gaa&ndotb;akuhara&mdota; kantijo&ndotb;h&amacr;jale&ndotb;a</hi>
    <l><hi>pecchant&imacr;&ndotb;a&mdota; hiaa&ndotb;ihia&mdota; &ndotb;iddalanto a dappa&mdota;</hi>
      <l rend="indent(2)"><hi>dol&amacr;l&imacr;l&amacr;saralataralo d&imacr;sae se muhend&umacr;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Paling the face of every beauty here, making the sky&apos;s vault to ripple with the liquid moonlight of her loveliness, and breaking the haughty pride in the hearts of maids that regard her, appeareth the moon-like orb of her face as she moveth straight to and fro in her sport on the swing.&rsquo; The effective alliteration and paronomasia of this stanza are surpassed by the metrical perfection of the next but one, where the P&rdotb;thv&imacr; metre, with &lsquo;its jingling tribrachs and bell-like, chiming cretics&rsquo;, is employed in a stanza which admirably conveys by its sound the sense at which it aims:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>ra&ndotb;antama&ndotb;i&ndotb;eura&mdota; jha&ndotb;ajha&ndotb;antah&amacr;raccha&ddotb;a&mdota;</hi>
      <l rend="indent(2)"><hi>ka&ndotb;akka&ndotb;iaki&nmacr;ki&ndotb;&imacr;muhalamehal&amacr;&ddotb;ambara&mdota;</hi>
    <l><hi>vilolavala&amacr;val&imacr;ja&ndotb;iamañjusiñj&amacr;rava&mdota;</hi>
      <l rend="indent(2)"><hi>&ndotb;a kassa ma&ndotb;omoha&ndotb;a&mdota; sasimuh&imacr;a hindola&ndotb;a&mdota;.</hi>
</lg>

<p>&nbsp;

<lg>
    <l>&lsquo;With the tinkling jewelled anklets,    &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;With the sound of lovely jingles
    <l>With the flashing jewelled necklace,    &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;From the rows of rolling bangles,
    <l>With the show of girdles garrulous      &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Pray whose heart is not bewildered
    <l>From their ringing, ringing bells       &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;While the moon-faced maiden swings?&rsquo;
</lg>

<p>Excellent also is the king&apos;s address<note n=2 id=n238.2>ii. 47.</note> to the Açoka when made to blossom by the touch of the foot of his young beloved, but more characteristic in his comment,<note n=3 id=n238.3>ii. 49.</note> inspired by the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka&apos;s <pb n=239 id=pb239 facs="f:239">ungallant comparison of the fresh beauty of the maiden with the <hi>passée</hi> comeliness of his queen:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>b&amacr;l&amacr;u honti ku&umacr;hale&ndotb;a emeya cavalacitt&amacr;o</hi>
    <l><hi>daralasiatha&ndotb;&imacr;su pu&ndotb;o &ndotb;ivasai maaraddhaarahassa&mdota;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Though maidens in their young zest for life are fickle of faith, yet it is with them&mdash;their breasts just budding&mdash;that the mystery of the dolphin-bannered doth abide.&rsquo;

<p>For technique R&amacr;jaçekhara is of interest, because he uses in the <hi>Karp&umacr;ramañjar&imacr;</hi> the old form of prologue quite openly, with the N&amacr;nd&imacr; recited doubtless by the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra, followed by the advent of the Sth&amacr;paka who recites two verses. It is noteworthy that the manuscripts often alter the Sth&amacr;paka to the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra despite the clear sense of the text. The late <hi>P&amacr;rvat&imacr;pari&ndotb;aya</hi> likewise has a N&amacr;nd&imacr; before the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra speaks a verse. It is probable that the older technique long persisted in the south.

<p>R&amacr;jaçekhara&apos;s indebtedness to his predecessors is wholesale; the influence of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, Har&sdotb;a, and Bhavabh&umacr;ti is obvious, and it is probably an indication of his contemporaneity with, or slight posteriority to, Mur&amacr;ri that he does not seem to have known his writings. Influence of the vernacular or of Pr&amacr;krit is to be seen in his occasional use of rhyme, such as is found in the later <hi>G&imacr;tagovinda</hi> or the <hi>Mohamudgara</hi>.


<div2 id=ch10.6 n=6>
<head><ab type=divNum>6.</ab> <hi>Bh&imacr;ma&tdotb;a and K&sdotb;em&imacr;çvara</hi></head>

<p>A verse attributed to R&amacr;jaçekhara mentions the five dramas of Bh&imacr;ma&tdotb;a, of which the <hi>Svapnadaç&amacr;nana</hi> won him chief fame. He is described as a Kaliñjarapati, whence the suggestion has been made that he was a connection of the Candella king Har&sdotb;a of Jej&amacr;kabhukti, who, we know, was a contemporary of Mah&imacr;p&amacr;la of Kanyakubja, patron of R&amacr;jaçekhara, but we have no ground for positive assertion.<note n=1 id=n239.1>Konow, ID. p. 87; Peterson, <hi>Reports</hi>, ii. 63; Bhandarkar, <hi>Report</hi> (1897), p. xi.</note>

<p>The case is different with K&sdotb;em&imacr;çvara, who in his <hi>Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;akauçika</hi> wrote for Mah&imacr;p&amacr;la, doubtless the king of Kanyakubja, patron of R&amacr;jaçekhara. K&sdotb;em&imacr;çvara asserts his patron&apos;s victory over the Kar&ndotb;&amacr;&tdotb;as, which was doubtless the view taken in royal circles of the contest against the R&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;rak&umacr;&tdotb;a Indra III, who for his part claims victory over Mahodaya, or Kanyakubja.<note n=1 id=n239.1b sameAs=n239.1></note> A <pb n=240 id=pb240 facs="f:240">variant of the name is K&sdotb;emendra, but he is not to be identified with the Kashmirian poet of that name. His great-grandfather was called Vijayako&sdotb;&tdotb;ha or Vijayaprako&sdotb;&tdotb;ha, who is designated as both &Amacr;rya and &Amacr;c&amacr;rya, and was, therefore, a learned man of some sort.

<p>K&sdotb;em&imacr;çvara has left two dramas. The <hi>Nai&sdotb;adh&amacr;nanda</hi><note n=1 id=n240.1>Peterson, <hi>Reports</hi>, iii. 340 f.</note> in seven acts deals with the legend of Nala, famous in the epic and later. The <hi>Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;akauçika</hi><note n=2 id=n240.2>Ed. Calcutta, 1884; trs. L. Fritze, Leipzig, 1883. On the same theme is R&amacr;macandra&apos;s <hi>Satyahariçcandra</hi> (twelfth cent.); see Keith, JRAS. 1914, pp. 1104 f.</note> reveals the stupid story of Hariçcandra, who, seeing as he thought the sacrifice of a damsel on the fire rebukes the Kauçika Viçv&amacr;mitra, and in return for his gallant action is cursed by the irascible sage, who was merely bringing the sciences under his control. He secures pardon by the surrender of the earth and a thousand gold pieces; to secure the latter he sells wife and child to a Brahmin, and himself to a Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;la as a cemetery keeper. One day his wife brings the dead body of their child, but it turns out merely to be a trial of his character; his son is alive and is crowned king. The plot is as poor as the execution of the piece. He shows in metre a special fondness for the Çikhari&ndotb;&imacr;, which occurs 20 times, nearly as often as the Ç&amacr;rd&umacr;lavikr&imacr;&ddotb;ita (23), while the Vasantatilaka appears 27 times and the Çloka 36. His Pr&amacr;krits, Çaurasen&imacr; and a few <corr sic="M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;ri">M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr;</corr> stanzas, are artificial.

<p>The compilers of anthologies make little of K&sdotb;em&imacr;çvara, with sufficient reason, for his verses do not rise above mediocrity. The second stanza of the three-verse benediction in the <hi>Nai&sdotb;adh&amacr;nanda</hi> is on a common theme, but not unhappily expressed; it follows a verse in honour of Puru&sdotb;ottama and Çr&imacr;, with the usual impartiality of this period:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>asthi hy asthi pha&ndotb;&imacr; pha&ndotb;&imacr; kim aparam bhasma bhasmaiva tac</hi>
    <l><hi>carmaiva carma ki&mdota; tava jita&mdota; yenaivam utt&amacr;myasi</hi>
    <l><hi>nait&amacr;&mdota; dh&umacr;rta pa&ndotb;&imacr;karo&sdotb;i satatam m&umacr;rdhni sthit&amacr;&mdota; J&amacr;hnav&imacr;m</hi>
    <l><hi>ity eva&mdota; Çivay&amacr; sanarmagadito dy&umacr;te Hara&hdotb; p&amacr;tu va&hdotb;.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;A skull is but a skull, a serpent a serpent; what more? The ashes and the skin also which thou dost wear are but ashes and skin. What of thine hast thou lost that thus thou art outworn? Ah, rogue, it is that thou wilt not stake Jahnu&apos;s daughter that <pb n=241 id=pb241 facs="f:241">rests ever on thy crest. May Hara guard you, Hara to whom Çiv&amacr; once spake playfully when they diced.&rsquo;

<p>This amusing play on the unwillingness of Çiva to prolong the dicing after he has unsuccessfully staked his necklace of skulls and serpents, and his clothing of ashes and hide, is followed by a wearisome eulogy of the glances of the god in the T&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;ava dance, alluding to the great moments in his history. Similar bad taste is shown in the curious and unusual form of the last verse of the drama:

<lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>yen&amacr;diçya prayoga&mdota; ghanapulakabh&rdotb;t&amacr; n&amacr;&tdotb;akasy&amacr;sya har&sdotb;&amacr;d</hi>
    <l><hi>vastr&amacr;la&mdota;k&amacr;rahemn&amacr;m pratidinam ak&rdotb;ç&amacr; r&amacr;çaya&hdotb; sampradatt&amacr;&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>tasya k&sdotb;attrapras&umacr;ter bhramatu jagad ida&mdota; K&amacr;rttikeyasya k&imacr;rti&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>p&amacr;re k&sdotb;&imacr;r&amacr;mbhusindho ravikaviyaças&amacr; s&amacr;rdham agresarena.</hi>
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>&lsquo;Through all the universe beyond the ocean of milk, heralded by the fame of his bard, the sun, may the fame wander of that scion of heroism, that god of war, who bade this drama be performed and who in keen delight at the pleasure he found in it gave daily to the poet abundant store of raiment, jewels and gold.&rsquo; Such a mode of immortalizing himself, and his patron can hardly be regarded as precisely dignified, and it certainly is not in harmony with the traditions of the drama.






<pb n=242 id=pb242 facs="f:242">
<div1 id=ch11 n=XI>
<head type=label>XI</head>

<head>THE DECLINE OF THE SANSKRIT DRAMA</head>


<div2 id=ch11.1 n=1>
<head><ab type=divNum>1.</ab> <hi>The Decadence of the Drama</hi></head>

<p>We have seen already in Mur&amacr;ri and R&amacr;jaçekhara the process which was depriving the drama of real dramatic quality. The older poets were, indeed, under the influence of the epic; they lived in the atmosphere of the poetry of the court and their dramatic instincts had always to fight against the tendency to introduce epic and lyric verses into their works, heedless of the ruin thus wrought on the drama. Had the stage been a more popular one, this defect might have been counteracted, but the audience for whose approval a poet looked was essentially one of men of learning, who were intent on discerning poetic beauties or defects, and who, as the theory proves, had singularly little idea of what a drama really means.

<p>Other factors doubtless helped the decline of the drama. The invasion of the Mahomedans into northern India, which began in earnest with the opening of the eleventh century, was a slow process, and it could not immediately affect the progress of the dramatic art. But gradually, by substituting Mahomedan rulers&mdash;men who disliked and feared the influence of the national religion, which was closely bound up with the drama&mdash;for Hindu princes, the generous and accomplished patrons of the dramatists, it must have exercised a depressing effect on the cultivation of this literary form. The drama doubtless took refuge in those parts of India where Moslem power was slowest to extend, but even there Mahomedan potentates gained authority, and drama can have been seldom worth performing or composing, until the Hindu revival asserted the Indian national spirit, and gave an encouragement to the renewal of an ancient national glory.

<p>Yet a further and most important consideration must have lain in the ever-widening breach between the languages of the <pb n=243 id=pb243 facs="f:243">drama and those of real life. In Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s days and even those of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa we may imagine that there was not too great difficulty in following the main features of the drama both in Sanskrit and in Pr&amacr;krit, but the gulf between the popular languages and those of learning went on widening every year, and R&amacr;jaçekhara, as we have seen, was, despite his boasted studies, of which we have no reason to doubt, unable to discriminate correctly his Pr&amacr;krits. It in no wise disproves this view that the <hi>Lalitavigrahar&amacr;jan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi> of Somadeva shows a close connexion with the language as laid down in Hemacandra&apos;s grammar, for, as that work preceded the play in date and was produced at the court of A&ndotb;hilv&amacr;&ddotb;, which was in close connexion with that of Sambh&amacr;r, where Somadeva lived, we need not doubt that copies of Hemacandra&apos;s work were available for the production of artificial Pr&amacr;krit.

<p>It was clearly a very different thing to compose in Sanskrit and Pr&amacr;krit in <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1000, when the vernaculars were beginning to assume literary form, than in <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 400, and the difficulty of composition in any effective manner must have rapidly increased with the years, and the growth of the realization that it was idle to seek fame under modern circumstances by the composition of dramas, for which there was no popular audience and only a limited market. What is amazing is that for centuries the Sanskrit drama continued to be produced in very substantial numbers, as the existence of manuscripts proves, and that so strong was the force of tradition that the first attempt to introduce the vernacular into the drama by Bidy&amacr;pati &Tdotb;h&amacr;kur in Behar took the form of producing works in which the characters use Sanskrit and Pr&amacr;krit and the songs only are in Maithil&imacr;. So powerful has been the strength of the Sanskrit drama that it is only in the nineteenth century that vernacular drama has exhibited itself in Hindi, and in general it is only very recently that the drama has seemed proper for vernacular expression. But the writing in artificial languages has revenged itself on the writers; their works are reminiscent of modern copies of Greek or Latin verses, which only too painfully reveal through all the artifices suggested by careful study the impossibility of the production of real poetry, not to mention drama, in dead languages. It is significant in this regard that perhaps the most interesting of later dramas is the <hi>Prabodhacandrodaya</hi> of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;amiçra, a <pb n=244 id=pb244 facs="f:244">drama of allegory on philosophical topics, which claim as their right Sanskrit as a mode of expression. The Sanskrit of the author thus represents the medium of his habitual use in discussions and is appropriate to the matters dealt with.

<p>This is essentially the period when the dramatic rules, strong in their hold earlier over the minds of dramatists, attain even greater sway. It is to this that we owe the few specimens we have of the rarer types of drama which are not represented among the scanty remains of the classical drama. There is no reason to suppose that these types were popular among the earlier dramatists; they had, it seems, their vogue in the time before the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> assumed its present form, but were rejected as unsuitable by the classical drama. We have also specimens of types which may have been regularly produced in classical times, but none of which are represented in the extant literature. Finally, we have specimens of new forms, the result of efforts to introduce into Sanskrit dramatic forms which had sprung up in more popular circles.


<div2 id=ch11.2 n=2>
<head><ab type=divNum>2.</ab> <hi>The N&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi></head>

<p>The N&amacr;&tdotb;aka remains throughout the post-classical period of the drama the natural exponent of the higher form of the dramatic art. No change of importance appears in its character; it merely steadily develops those features which we have seen in full process of production in Mur&amacr;ri and R&amacr;jaçekhara, the subordination of action to description, and the degeneration of the description into a mere exercise in style and in the use of sounds.

<p>The character of the decline is obvious enough in the <hi>Prasannar&amacr;ghava</hi>,<note n=1 id=n244.1>Ed. Bombay, 1894; Poona, 1894; cf. Baumgartner, <hi lang=de>Das Râmâya&ndotb;a</hi>, pp. 129 ff.</note> a N&amacr;&tdotb;aka in seven Acts, in which the logician Jayadeva (<hi>c.</hi> <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1200), son of Mah&amacr;deva and Sumitr&amacr;, of Ku&ndotb;&ddotb;ina in Berar, endeavours to tell again the story of the <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>.<note n=2 id=n244.2>Cf. Peterson, <hi>Subh&amacr;&sdotb;it&amacr;vali</hi>, pp. 38 f.; Keith, <hi>Indian Logic</hi>, pp. 33 f. The verses common to the play and the <hi>Mah&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi> are clearly not evidence of prior date, despite Lévi, TI. ii. 48; Konow, ID. p. 88. He is later than Mur&amacr;ri; Hall&apos;s (DR. p. 36 n.) suggested reference to Jayadeva in comm. on DR. ii. 10 is incorrect. He is known to R. (<hi>c.</hi> <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1330)<corr>,</corr> iii. 171 f., and the <hi>Ç&amacr;r&nmacr;gadharapaddhati</hi>.</note> In Act I a disciple of Y&amacr;jñavalkya appears and repeats from the speech of two bees heard behind the scene the news they are discussing; the Asura B&amacr;&ndotb;a is to rival R&amacr;va&ndotb;a for the hand of <pb n=245 id=pb245 facs="f:245">S&imacr;t&amacr;. Two heralds then appear to describe the suitors for the maiden&apos;s hand; they are interrupted and insulted by a gross and rough arrival who casts a contemptuous eye on the bow which the suitor must bend, and would forcibly seize the prize. The heralds soothe him, but he assumes the monstrous form of R&amacr;va&ndotb;a with his ten heads. B&amacr;&ndotb;a then appears, tries in vain the bow, insults R&amacr;va&ndotb;a and retires. In Act II we have a ludicrous scene in which R&amacr;ma watches S&imacr;t&amacr; and her friend; both he and she describe the beauties of the union of the V&amacr;sant&imacr; creeper and the mango-tree, an allusion to their own state to be, and confronted shyly whisper love. In Act III we have an intolerable series of compliments exchanged by all the parties, Viçv&amacr;mitra, Çat&amacr;nanda, Janaka, Daçaratha, R&amacr;ma, and Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a; Viçv&amacr;mitra bids R&amacr;ma bend the bow of Çiva, though a message from Paraçur&amacr;ma deprecates such an insult. The bow is broken, there is great joy, and the marriage is celebrated. In Act IV Paraçur&amacr;ma himself arrives; his great feats are set out in a dialogue of R&amacr;ma and Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a; he encounters them, exchanges harangues, is dissuaded by Janaka, Çat&amacr;nanda, and Viçv&amacr;mitra from battle, but an insult of his to Viçv&amacr;mitra breaks down R&amacr;ma&apos;s patience; they fight, R&amacr;ma is victor, but falls at his rival&apos;s feet and asks his blessing. In Act V we have a new and picturesque conception and one wholly aloof from drama. The river goddess Yamun&amacr; tells Ga&nmacr;g&amacr; of her grief at V&amacr;lin&apos;s act in exiling his brother, Sugr&imacr;va. Saray&umacr; joins them and reports the fate of R&amacr;ma until his departure for exile; her flamingo arrives to carry on the tale until R&amacr;ma&apos;s fatal departure in pursuit of a golden deer. Anxious, the rivers hasten to the ocean, S&amacr;gara, to learn the news; they find God&amacr;var&imacr; in converse with S&amacr;gara; she tells of the rape of S&imacr;t&amacr;, the death of Ja&tdotb;&amacr;yu, the fall of S&imacr;t&amacr;&apos;s jewels and their transport to &Rdotb;&sdotb;yamukha. The Tu&nmacr;gabhadr&amacr; arrives with her tale; R&amacr;ma has slain V&amacr;lin and made alliance with Sugr&imacr;va and Hanumant. Suddenly a great mass flies over the ocean. Is it the Him&amacr;laya? the Vindhya? S&amacr;gara goes out to see and the rivers follow. In Act VI we find that sorrow has all but driven R&amacr;ma mad; he asks the birds, the moon, for his beloved. Fortunately two Vidy&amacr;dharas by magic art are able to show him the events in La&nmacr;k&amacr;; S&imacr;t&amacr; appears, saddened lest R&amacr;ma suspect, or be faithless to her; R&amacr;va&ndotb;a seeks her love; she <pb n=246 id=pb246 facs="f:246">despises him; angry, he reaches out his hand for his sword to slay her, but receives in it the head of his son, Ak&sdotb;a, slain by Hanumant, who it is who has leaped the ocean and attacked La&nmacr;k&amacr;. S&imacr;t&amacr; is desperate; she seeks to burn herself on a funeral pyre, but the coal changes to pearl, and Hanumant consoles her by news of R&amacr;ma&apos;s fidelity. In Act VII R&amacr;va&ndotb;a is given by Prahasta a picture sent by M&amacr;lyavant showing the details of the enemy&apos;s attack and the bridge; he refuses to regard it as more than a painter&apos;s fancy; Mandodar&imacr;, his wife, enters; she has received an oracular response which terrifies her and also Prahasta, but R&amacr;va&ndotb;a scorns it. At last, however, he realizes that the city is attacked, sends Kumbhakar&ndotb;a and Meghan&amacr;da to their death, and at last himself issues forth to die; his fate is described by a Vidy&amacr;dhara and his mate. Then enter R&amacr;ma, S&imacr;t&amacr;, Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a, Vibh&imacr;&sdotb;a&ndotb;a, and Sugr&imacr;va, who all describe in turn the setting of the sun and the rise of the moon; they mount the aerial car, describe a few points of interest in the country over which they pass in their journey north, and then in turn solemnly describe the rising of the sun.

<p>The play is typical of the later drama; its one merit is Act V where the spectacle of the river goddesses grouped round the ocean affords admirable scope for an effective tableau, but it is wholly out of harmony with dramatic action. As usual, the author is fond of the long metres, though the Vasantatilaka is his favourite; then comes the Ç&amacr;rd&umacr;lavikr&imacr;&ddotb;ita, Çloka, Çikhari&ndotb;&imacr;, and Sragdhar&amacr;, while he shows decided fondness for the Sv&amacr;gat&amacr;, which occurs a few times in R&amacr;jaçekhara and the <hi>Mah&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, but is not employed in the earlier drama. The drama is superior in merit to the other very popular R&amacr;ma drama, the <hi>J&amacr;nak&imacr;pari&ndotb;aya</hi><note n=1 id=n246.1>Ed. Madras, 1892; trs. by L. V. Ramachandra Aiyar, Madras, 1906.</note> by R&amacr;mabhadra D&imacr;k&sdotb;ita, who flourished and wrote many bad works at the end of the seventeenth century. The number of R&amacr;ma dramas already known is enormous; any one of merit appears still to be unearthed. The commentary on the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi> knows a <hi>Chalitar&amacr;ma</hi> which would probably date before <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1000, but its preservation is problematical. The <hi>Adbhutadarpa&ndotb;a</hi><note n=2 id=n246.2>Ed. KM. 1896.</note> of Mah&amacr;deva, son of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a S&umacr;ri, a contemporary of R&amacr;mabhadra D&imacr;k&sdotb;ita, shows Jayadeva&apos;s influence in that it presents the events <pb n=247 id=pb247 facs="f:247">at La&nmacr;k&amacr; as happening by means of a magic mirror. Its ten acts cover only the period from A&nmacr;gada&apos;s mission to R&amacr;va&ndotb;a to the coronation of R&amacr;ma, and it introduces, contrary to the rule in R&amacr;ma dramas, the figure of the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka.

<p>The K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a legend naturally attracted not less note; the Kerala prince Ravivarman, born in <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1266, is the author of a <hi>Pradyumn&amacr;bhyudaya</hi>.<note n=1 id=n247.1>Ed. TSS. 1910.</note> The minister of Husain Sh&amacr;h R&umacr;pa Gosv&amacr;min wrote about <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1532 the <hi>Vidagdham&amacr;dhava</hi><note n=2 id=n247.2>Ed. KM. 1903.</note> and the <hi>Lalitam&amacr;dhava</hi><note n=3 id=n247.3>Ed. Murçid&amacr;b&amacr;d, 1880 f.</note> in seven and ten Acts respectively on the theme of the loves of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a and R&amacr;dh&amacr;, in pursuance of his eager support of the movement of Caitanya. For the son of &Tdotb;odar Mall, Akbar&apos;s minister, Çe&sdotb;a K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a wrote the <hi>Ka&ndota;savadha</hi><note n=4 id=n247.4>Ed. KM. 1888.</note> which in seven Acts covers the ground of Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s <hi>B&amacr;lacarita</hi>, as well as other plays on the R&amacr;ma legend. The winning of Rukmi&ndotb;&imacr; by K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a is the theme of the <hi>Rukmi&ndotb;&imacr;pari&ndotb;aya</hi><note n=5 id=n247.5>Ed. KM. 1894.</note> by R&amacr;mavarman of Travancore (1735&ndash;87), and K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a&apos;s generosity to a poor friend, though in a surprising shape, is recounted by S&amacr;mar&amacr;ja D&imacr;k&sdotb;ita in the <hi>Çr&imacr;d&amacr;macarita</hi><note n=6 id=n247.6>Wilson, ii. 404.</note> written in <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1681.

<p>The number of dramas based on the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;rata</hi> is decidedly smaller. We have not the <hi>Citrabh&amacr;rata</hi> of the indefatigable K&sdotb;emendra of Kashmir, who wrote in the middle of the eleventh century. But from that century probably are the <hi>Subhadr&amacr;dhana&mdota;jaya</hi> and <hi>Tapat&imacr;sa&mdota;vara&ndotb;a</hi><note n=7 id=n247.7>Ed. TSS. 1912 and 1911.</note> of the Kerala king Kulaçekharavarman, and from about <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1200 the <hi>P&amacr;rthapar&amacr;krama</hi>,<note n=8 id=n247.8>Ed. GOS. 1917.</note> a Vy&amacr;yoga, to be discussed hereafter, of Prahl&amacr;danadeva, a Yuvar&amacr;ja, brother of Dh&amacr;r&amacr;var&sdotb;a, lord of Candr&amacr;vat&imacr;.

<p>Of other mythological subjects we have the <hi>Harakelin&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi><note n=9 id=n247.9>Kielhorn, <hi lang=de>Bruchstücke indischer Schauspiele</hi>, Berlin, 1901.</note> of the C&amacr;ham&amacr;na king V&imacr;saladeva Vigrahar&amacr;ja, of whom we have an inscription of <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1163, and whose work is partially preserved on stone. The <hi>P&amacr;rvat&imacr;pari&ndotb;aya</hi><note n=10 id=n247.10>Ed. R. Schmidt, Leipzig, 1917; trs. K. Glaser, Trieste, 1886. Cf. GIL. iii. 248, n. 4.</note> of V&amacr;mana Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a B&amacr;&ndotb;a, who wrote about <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1400 under the Re&ddotb;&ddotb;i prince Vema of Ko&ndotb;&ddotb;av&imacr;&ddotb;u, owes its fame to its being mistaken for a work of B&amacr;&ndotb;a. The <hi>Haragaur&imacr;viv&amacr;ha</hi><note n=11 id=n247.11>Lévi, <hi lang=fr>Le Népal</hi>, ii. 242.</note> of Jagajjyotirmalla of Nepal (1617&ndash;33) is interesting, because it is rather an opera than a play and the <pb n=248 id=pb248 facs="f:248">vernacular verses are its only fixed element, but this is not likely to be a primitive feature.

<p>Of dramas with lesser personages of the saga as heroes we have the <hi>Bhairav&amacr;nanda</hi><note n=1 id=n248.1>Harapras&amacr;d, <hi>Nepal Catal.</hi>, p. xxxvii.</note> of the Nepalese poet Ma&ndotb;ika from the end of the fourteenth century, and at least a century later the <hi>Bhart&rdotb;harinirveda</hi><note n=2 id=n248.2>Ed. KM. 1900; trs. L. H. Gray, JAOS. xxv. 197 ff.</note> of Harihara, which is interesting, as it shows the popularity of Bhart&rdotb;hari; he is represented as desolated by his wife&apos;s death, through despair on a false rumour of his own death, but, consoled by a Yogin, he attains indifference, so that, when his wife is recalled to life, neither she nor their child has any attraction for him.

<p>Of historical drama we have little, and that of small value. The <hi>Lalitavigrahar&amacr;jan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>,<note n=3 id=n248.3>Ed. Kielhorn, <hi>op. cit.</hi></note> preserved in part in an inscription, is a work of the latter part of the twelfth century by Somadeva in honour of V&imacr;saladeva Vigrahar&amacr;ja, the C&amacr;ham&amacr;na. The <hi>Prat&amacr;parudrakaly&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi><note n=4 id=n248.4>Ed. Bombay, 1891.</note> by <corr sic="Vidy&amacr;natha">Vidy&amacr;n&amacr;tha</corr>, inserted in his treatise on rhetoric as an illustration of the drama, celebrates his patron, a king of Warangal about <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1300.

<p>More interesting is the <hi>Hamm&imacr;ramadamardana</hi>,<note n=5 id=n248.5>Ed. <hi>Gaekwad&apos;s Oriental Series</hi>, no. x, 1920. On the merits of Vastup&amacr;la see also Arisi&ndota;ha&apos;s <hi>Suk&rdotb;tasa&mdota;k&imacr;rtana</hi> and Someçvara&apos;s <hi>K&imacr;rtikaumud&imacr;</hi>.</note> written between <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1219 and 1229 by Jayasi&ndota;ha S&umacr;ri, the priest of the temple of Munisuvrata at Broach. It appears that Teja&hdotb;p&amacr;la, brother of Vastup&amacr;la, minister of V&imacr;radhavala of Gujar&amacr;t, visited the temple, and, with the assent of his brother, complied with the request of Jayasi&ndota;ha for the erection of twenty-five golden flagstaffs for Devakulik&amacr;s. As a reward Jayasi&ndota;ha not merely celebrated the brothers in a panegyric, of which a copy has been preserved along with his drama, but wrote, to please Jayantasi&ndota;ha, son of Vastup&amacr;la, the play for performance at the festival of the procession of the god Bh&imacr;meçvara at Cambay. He claims that it includes all nine sentiments, in contrast to Prakara&ndotb;as, exploiting the sentiment of fear, with which the audience has been surfeited.

<p>In Act I, after the introductory dialogue between the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra and an actor, V&imacr;radhavala is brought in, conversing with Teja&hdotb;p&amacr;la, the theme being the extraordinary merits of Vastup&amacr;la <pb n=249 id=pb249 facs="f:249">as a statesman. But times are still troublous; the realm is menaced by the Turu&sdotb;ka Hamm&imacr;ra, by the Y&amacr;dava Si&ndota;hana,<note n=1 id=n249.1>Usually Si&nmacr;gha&ndotb;a or Si&ndota;ha&ndotb;a. Cf. Bhandarkar, <hi>Report</hi> (1907), pp. 15 ff., who equates <corr sic="M&imacr;lacch&imacr;k&amacr;ra">M&imacr;lacchr&imacr;k&amacr;ra</corr> with Shamsu-d-din (1210&ndash;35).</note> who may hope for aid from Sa&mdota;gr&amacr;masi&ndota;ha, nephew of Si&ndota;ha, lord of L&amacr;&tdotb;a. Vastup&amacr;la enters, and extols the skill of Teja&hdotb;p&amacr;la&apos;s son L&amacr;va&ndotb;yasi&ndota;ha, whose spies bring in valuable information. He then with Teja&hdotb;p&amacr;la compliments the king, who tells them of his proposed attack on Hamm&imacr;ra. Vastup&amacr;la warns him against excessive valour in pursuit, and counsels him to secure the aid of the M&amacr;rv&amacr;r princes. In Act II we find that the advice has been followed with success, as related by L&amacr;va&ndotb;yasi&ndota;ha, who has an opportunity of repaying the compliments showered on him by his uncle. The spy Nipu&ndotb;aka then enters with a tale of success; he has entered Si&ndota;hana&apos;s camp, passed himself off as a spy on V&imacr;radhavala&apos;s movements, reported that that king was making ready an attack on Hamm&imacr;ra, and persuaded Si&ndota;hana to wait in the forest of the Tapti a favourable opportunity to attack V&imacr;radhavala, after his forces have been weakened by battle with Hamm&imacr;ra. In the meantime Nipu&ndotb;aka&apos;s brother Suvega, who has been serving Devap&amacr;la of M&amacr;lava, steals the best steed of his master and presents it to Sa&mdota;gr&amacr;masi&ndota;ha, who is leading Si&ndota;hana&apos;s army. He then presents himself in the guise of a T&amacr;pasa to Si&ndota;hana, but runs away when the king goes to pay him due honour. Suspicion is thus aroused, and Suvega is seized; from his matted locks is extracted a letter addressed to Sa&mdota;gr&amacr;masi&ndota;ha. It refers to the horse which it treats as a present from Devap&amacr;la to Sa&mdota;gr&amacr;masi&ndota;ha, and advises him to attack Si&ndota;hana when he has entered Gujar&amacr;t, the M&amacr;lava king engaging to assail him at that moment. Si&ndota;hana asks Nipu&ndotb;aka to ascertain the truth about the horse, and he has no difficulty through Suvega in terrifying Sa&mdota;gr&amacr;masi&ndota;ha into flight. We then find Vastup&amacr;la on the stage; his spy Kuçalaka reports that Sa&mdota;gr&amacr;masi&ndota;ha menaces Cambay; Vastup&amacr;la takes precautions for its defence, and summons Bhuvanap&amacr;la, Sa&mdota;gr&amacr;masi&ndota;ha&apos;s minister, with whom he arrives at an understanding, assuring V&imacr;radhavala of that prince&apos;s aid. In Act III V&imacr;radhavala and Teja&hdotb;p&amacr;la hear from a spy Kamalaka the fate of Mew&amacr;r&apos;s king Jayatala; attacked by the Mlecchas, the people in despair flung <pb n=250 id=pb250 facs="f:250">themselves into wells, burned themselves in their houses or hanged themselves, until he had heartened them and discouraged the foe by announcing the approach of V&imacr;radhavala, at whose name the Turu&sdotb;kas fled in terror. V&imacr;radhavala extols the cleverness of Vastup&amacr;la, who has enabled him to dispose of all his enemies save the Mlecchas, and Teja&hdotb;p&amacr;la assures him of <corr sic=succes>success</corr> even against these foes. What Vastup&amacr;la is doing is shown by a conversation between two spies, Kuvalayaka and Ç&imacr;ghraka, which forms the entr&apos;acte to Act IV; he has induced the Kaliph of Baghdad by a false report to instruct Kharpara Kh&amacr;na to send M&imacr;lacchr&imacr;k&amacr;ra to him in chains, and he has won over various G&umacr;rjara princes by promising them the lands of the Turu&sdotb;kas when they are defeated. We then find M&imacr;lacchr&imacr;k&amacr;ra discussing his situation with his minister Gor&imacr; &Imacr;sapa; Kharpara Kh&amacr;na, on the one hand, and V&imacr;radhavala press him hard; the king declines, however, even to think of retreat, but both king and minister flee hastily before the sound of the approach of V&imacr;radhavala&apos;s army and the voice of the king, who is disappointed not to capture his foes, but obeys loyally Vastup&amacr;la&apos;s counsel against rash pursuit. Act V shows us the triumphant return of the king, his reunion with his wife Jayataladev&imacr;, and exchange of felicitations with Vastup&amacr;la and Teja&hdotb;p&amacr;la. We learn that Vastup&amacr;la has accomplished a further feat; he has intercepted at sea Rad&imacr; and Kad&imacr;, M&imacr;lacchr&imacr;k&amacr;ra&apos;s preceptors, returning from Baghdad, and the king has been forced, in order to secure their safety, to enter into friendly relations. Finally the king enters Çiva&apos;s temple, where the god presents himself before him, and grants him a boon; the king, however, has little that is not formal to ask, so fortunate is he in his ministers.

<p>Neither as history nor as poetry does the work claim any high merit. Its chief aim is to provide unlimited eulogy for Vastup&amacr;la and Teja&hdotb;p&amacr;la, and secondarily for the king who is lucky enough to have in his retinue these remarkable models of intelligence and skill. It must be admitted, however, that the author does not exactly convey the impression of the real success of his objects of admiration; the impression is rather one of minor successes and a good deal of rather obvious diplomacy. Style, Pr&amacr;krit, and metres are decidedly stereotyped.

<p>A certain number of dramas of similar type has been preserved.<note n=1 id=n250.1>We hear of a <hi>R&amacr;jar&amacr;jan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi> performed annually in a temple of Çiva by order of the Cola R&amacr;jar&amacr;ja I of Tanjore in the eleventh century, but of its content we know nothing; H. Krishna Sastri in Ridgeway&apos;s <hi>Dramas</hi>, &amp;c., p. 204.</note> <pb n=251 id=pb251 facs="f:251">Ga&nmacr;g&amacr;dhara&apos;s <hi>Ga&nmacr;gad&amacr;saprat&amacr;pavil&amacr;sa</hi><note n=2 id=n251.2><hi>India Office Catal.</hi>, no. 4194.</note> celebrates the struggle of a Camp&amacr;n&imacr;r prince against Muhammed II, Sh&amacr;h of Gujar&amacr;t (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1443&ndash;52). The stream, though scanty, flows continuously to the <hi>&Ddotb;ill&imacr;s&amacr;mr&amacr;jya</hi><note n=3 id=n251.3>Ed. Madras, 1912.</note> of Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a S&umacr;ri of 1912.

<p>The adaptation of English drama is seen in R. K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;amachari&apos;s adaptation in 1892 of the <hi>Midsummer Night&apos;s Dream</hi> in his <hi>V&amacr;santikasvapna</hi>.<note n=4 id=n251.4>Kumbhakonam, 1892.</note>


<div2 id=ch11.3 n=3>
<head><ab type=divNum>3.</ab> <hi>The Allegorical N&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi></head>

<p>We cannot say whether K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;amiçra&apos;s <hi>Prabodhacandrodaya</hi><note n=5 id=n251.5>Ed. Bombay, 1898; trs. J. Taylor, Bombay, 1893. Cf. J. W. Boissevain, <hi>Prabodhacandrodaya</hi>, Leiden, 1905.</note> was a revival of a form of drama, which had been practised regularly if on a small scale since Açvagho&sdotb;a or whether it was a new creation, as may easily have been the case. At any rate, his work can be dated with precision; it was produced for one Gop&amacr;la in the presence of the Candella king K&imacr;rtivarman of Jej&amacr;kabhukti, of whom we have an inscription of <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1098. Gop&amacr;la had restored, we learn, K&imacr;rtivarman after his defeat by Kar&ndotb;a of Cedi, who was living in <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1042, but we can only guess that he was a general. The play in its six Acts is devoted to the defence of the Advaita form of the Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u doctrine, a combination of Ved&amacr;nta with Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;uism.

<p>The supreme reality which is truly one, but is united with illusion, has a son, Spirit, who again has two children, Discrimination (<hi>viveka</hi>) and Confusion (<hi>moha</hi>); the posterity of the latter has largely gained in strength, and the position of the former and his offspring is menaced. This is told us at the outset of the drama by Love in converse with Desire; the former is sure he has done much to attain the result. The one danger is the old prophecy that there will arise Knowledge (<hi>prabodha</hi>) and Judgement or Science (<hi>vidy&amacr;</hi>) from the union of Discrimination and Theology, Upani&sdotb;ad, but these two are long since parted, and their reunion seems unlikely. The two, however, flee before the approach of the king Discrimination who is talking with Reason <pb n=252 id=pb252 facs="f:252">(<hi>mati</hi>), one of his wives; to his joy he finds that she is all in favour of his reunion with Theology which she is fain to bring about. In Act II we find Confusion in fear of overthrow; he hastens by the use of Falsity (<hi>dambha</hi>) to secure Benares as the key of the world; Egoism, grandfather of Falsity, visits the city and discovers to his joy his relative. Confusion enters in triumphant pomp his new capital; the Materialist C&amacr;rv&amacr;ka supports him. But there is bad news; Duty is rising in revolt; Theology meditates reunion with Discrimination; Confusion bids his minions cast Piety, daughter of Faith (<hi>çraddh&amacr;</hi>) in prison and orders Heresy (<hi>mithy&amacr;d&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;i</hi>) to separate Theology and Faith. In Act III Piety appears supported by her friend Pity; she has lost her mother Faith and is in sad plight, even dreaming of suicide, from which Pity dissuades her. In Digambara Jainism, Buddhism, and Somism she searches in vain for Faith; each appears with a wife claiming to be Faith, but she cannot recognize her mother in these distorted forms. Buddhism and Jainism quarrel; Somism enters, makes them drunk with alcohol and pleasure, and takes them off in search of Piety, the daughter of Faith. In Act IV Faith in great distress tells of a danger; she and Duty have escaped from a demoness who would have devoured them but for Trust in Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u, who has saved them. She brings a message to Discrimination to start the battle. He musters his leaders, Contemplation, Patience, Contentment, and himself goes to Benares, which he describes. In Act V the battle is over; Confusion and his offspring are dead. But Spirit is disconsolate, mourning the loss of Confusion and Activity. The doctrine of Vy&amacr;sa, the Ved&amacr;nta, appears, disabuses his mind of error, and he resolves to settle down as a hermit with the one wife worthy of him, Inactivity. Act VI shows us the ancestor of all Being; he is still under the influence of Confusion, who, before dying, dispatched to him spirits to confuse him, and his companion, Illusion, favours their efforts. But his friend Reasoning shows him his error, and he drives them away. Peace of heart reunites Theology and Discrimination; she tells of her mishaps with Cult and Exegesis, Ny&amacr;ya and S&amacr;&mdota;khya, and reveals to Being that he is the Supreme Lord. This, however, is too much for his intellect, but the difficulty is cleared away by Judgement, which is the immediate supernatural child of the reunion of the <pb n=253 id=pb253 facs="f:253">spouses. The appearance of Trust (<hi><corr sic="b&hdotb;akti">bhakti</corr></hi>) in Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u to applaud the result terminates the drama.

<p>No one can doubt the cleverness with which the strife of races of one stock in the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;rata</hi> and the plot and love interest of the usual N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr; are combined, nor the ingenuity of fitting in the Ved&amacr;nta doctrine of the Absolute and the devotion of the Vai&sdotb;&ndotb;ava creed. There is certainly some comedy in the exchange of views of Egoism and Falsity, who are perfect examples of hypocrisy, and the scenes between Buddhism, Jainism, and Somism are distinctly funny. None the less it would be idle to pretend that the play has any dramatic force. Its chief merits are its effective and stately stanzas of moral and philosophical content. K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;amiçra is an able master of the Ç&amacr;rd&umacr;lavikr&imacr;&ddotb;ita, his favourite metre; he has also effective Vasantatilakas, and rhymed Pr&amacr;krit stanzas.

<p>K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;amiçra&apos;s example has caused the production of numerous dramas of the same type, but of much less value. The <hi>Sa&mdota;kalpas&umacr;ryodaya</hi><note n=1 id=n253.1>Ed. K&amacr;ñc&imacr;, 1914; trs. K. Narayanacharya and D. Raghunathaswamy Iyengar, vol. i. Srirangam, 1917.</note> of Ve&nmacr;ka&tdotb;an&amacr;tha of the fourteenth century is excessively dreary, but it is better than the famous <hi>Caitanyacandrodaya</hi><note n=2 id=n253.2>Ed. KM. 1906; analysed by Lévi, TI. i. 237 ff. Date, <hi>c.</hi> <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1550.</note> of Kavikar&ndotb;ap&umacr;ra, which is an account of Caitanya&apos;s success, but which wholly fails to convey any suggestion of his spiritual power. He turns out as a long-winded discourser of a muddled theology, surrounded by obedient and unintelligent pupils. Two Çaiva dramas are the <hi>Vidy&amacr;pari&ndotb;ayana</hi><note n=3 id=n253.3>Ed. KM. 1893. Another imitation is the <hi>Am&rdotb;todaya</hi> of Gokulan&amacr;tha, Harapras&amacr;d, <hi>Report</hi> (1901), p. 17.</note> and <hi>J&imacr;v&amacr;nandana</hi><note n=4 id=n253.4>Ed. KM. 1891. For the author of the <hi>Vidy&amacr;pari&ndotb;ayana</hi> (Vedakavi, nominally &Amacr;nandar&amacr;ya) see KM. xliv. Pref. p. 9.</note> written at the end of the seventeenth and beginning of the eighteenth century. They have no merits.

<p>An example of a Jain allegory of comparatively early date is afforded by the <hi>Mohar&amacr;japar&amacr;jaya</hi>,<note n=5 id=n253.5>Ed. <hi>Gaekwad&apos;s Oriental Series</hi>, no. ix. 1918.</note> the conquest of King Confusion, describing the conversion of the Caulukya king of Gujar&amacr;t, Kum&amacr;rap&amacr;la, to Jainism, his prohibition of the killing of animals, and his cessation from the practice of confiscating the property of persons dying without heirs in the realm, as a result of the <pb n=254 id=pb254 facs="f:254">efforts of the famous sage, Hemacandra. The author, Yaça&hdotb;p&amacr;la, was the son of a minister Dhanadeva and Rukmi&ndotb;&imacr;, of the Mo&ddotb;ha Bania caste, and he served the Cakravartin Abhayadeva or Abhayap&amacr;la, who reigned after Kum&amacr;rap&amacr;la from <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1229&ndash;32. The play is in five Acts, and all the personages save the king, Hemacandra, and the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, are personifications of qualities, good and evil. The play was performed on the occasion of the festival of the idol of Mah&amacr;vira at the Kum&amacr;ravih&amacr;ra, or temple erected by Kum&amacr;rap&amacr;la, at Th&amacr;r&amacr;padra, where the author seems to have been governor or resident.

<p>The play begins with an invocation in three stanzas of the T&imacr;rthakaras, &Rdotb;&sdotb;abha, P&amacr;rçva, and Mah&amacr;v&imacr;ra, followed by the usual dialogue of the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra and the actress, his wife. Then are introduced Kum&amacr;rap&amacr;la with the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, to whom enter Jñ&amacr;nadarpa&ndotb;a, the Mirror of Knowledge, the spy who has been sent to report on the affairs of King Confusion. He reports the successful siege by Confusion of the city of Man&apos;s Mind, whose king, Vivekacandra, the Moon of Discrimination, has been forced to flee accompanied by his bride Calm, and his daughter K&rdotb;p&amacr;sundar&imacr;, in whom Compassion is incorporated, and of whose escape Kum&amacr;rap&amacr;la learns with joy. The spy further reports a meeting with K&imacr;rtimañjar&imacr;, the Garland of Fame, daughter of Good Conduct by his wife Polity, and herself wife of Kum&amacr;rap&amacr;la. She complains that the king has turned from her and her brother, Prat&amacr;pa, Valour, owing to the efforts of a Jain monk. She has, therefore, sought the aid of Confusion and he is preparing to attack Kum&amacr;rap&amacr;la. The spy, however, disappoints her by answering her inquiry as to the victory in the struggle by insisting that it will be Confusion that must fall. The king expresses his determination to overthrow Confusion, and the announcement of the hour of worship by bards terminates the Act.

<p>An entr&apos;acte then tells us through Pu&ndotb;yaketu, the Banner of Merit, minister of the king, that Discrimination has arrived at the penance grove of Hemacandra, and has met the king, who has looked favourably at his daughter. The Act itself shows us in the accustomed mode the king with the jester spying on K&rdotb;p&amacr;sundar&imacr; and Somat&amacr;, Gentleness,<note n=1 id=n254.1>This is probably the nuance intended, as in <hi>saumyat&amacr;</hi>.</note> her companion, and ultimately <pb n=255 id=pb255 facs="f:255">speaking to them; as usual the queen, R&amacr;jyaçr&imacr;, the Royal Fortune, with her companion, Raudrat&amacr;, Harshness, intervenes, and the king vainly craves pardon. In Act III Pu&ndotb;yaketu overcomes the obstacle to the match by a clever device; he stations one of his servants behind the image of the goddess to which the queen goes to seek the boon of the disfigurement of her rival, and thus, through apparent divine intervention, the queen is taught that by marriage with K&rdotb;p&amacr;sundar&imacr; alone can the king overcome Confusion, and is induced to beg Discrimination for the hand of his daughter. Discrimination consents, but insists that to please his daughter the seven vices must be banished, and the practice of confiscating the property of those dying without heirs shall be abolished, terms to which the queen consents. The king also agrees, and the Act ends in his action in forgoing the property of a millionaire believed dead, who, however, opportunely turns up with a new bride in an aerial car.

<p>In Act IV we have the fulfilment of the pledge to banish the seven vices. It first tells of the meeting of the Fortune of the City with that of the Country; the former persuades the latter to accept the tenets of Jainism. Then appears K&rdotb;p&amacr;sundar&imacr; who is annoyed by the noises of hunting and fishing, but consoled by the appearance of the police officer, who proceeds to the business of banishing vices. Gambling, Flesh-eating, Drinking, Slaughter, Theft, and Adultery must depart, despite the plea that the king&apos;s predecessors permitted them, and that they bring revenues to the State; Concubinage may remain if she will. In Act V the king, armed by Hemacandra with his <hi>Yogaç&amacr;stra</hi>, which is his armour, and the <hi>V&imacr;tar&amacr;gastuti</hi>, which serves to make him invisible, inspects the strong places of Confusion, and finally rendering himself visible does battle with the adversary and wins a great victory. He restores Discrimination to his capital, and pronounces a benediction in which praise of the Jina and of Hemacandra blend with the desire of close union with K&rdotb;p&amacr; and Discrimination, and the hope that &lsquo;my fame, allied with the moon, may prevail to dispel the darkness of Confusion&rsquo;.

<p>The play is certainly not without merits; in the main it is written in simple Sanskrit, free from the artifices which disfigure more pretentious plays, and it has also the merit of bringing vividly before us the activities of Jainism in its regulation of <pb n=256 id=pb256 facs="f:256">Kum&amacr;rap&amacr;la&apos;s kingdom, casting an interesting light on what is known from inscriptions and other sources of the history of Gujar&amacr;t. The marriage of the king with K&rdotb;p&amacr;sundar&imacr; is recorded by Jinama&ndotb;&ddotb;ana in his <hi>Kum&amacr;rap&amacr;laprabandha</hi> as taking place in <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1159. Interesting details are given of the forms of gambling, including chess, and of the sects which approve slaughter. The Pr&amacr;krits are, of course, deeply influenced by Hemacandra&apos;s grammar, and include M&amacr;gadh&imacr; and Jain M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr;.


<div2 id=ch11.4 n=4>
<head><ab type=divNum>4.</ab> <hi>The N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr; and the Sa&tdotb;&tdotb;aka</hi></head>

<p>The N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr; differs in no real essential from a N&amacr;&tdotb;aka save in the number of Acts, but its type continues to be rigidly restricted to that set by Har&sdotb;a. The <hi>Kar&ndotb;asundar&imacr;</hi><note n=1 id=n256.1>Ed. KM. 1888. Cf. Keith, <hi>Sansk. Lit.</hi>, pp. 64 ff.</note> of Bilha&ndotb;a belongs to the period about <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1080&ndash;90. It seems to have been written out of compliment to Kar&ndotb;adeva Trailokyamalla of A&ndotb;hilv&amacr;&ddotb; (1064&ndash;94), and to celebrate his wedding in advanced age with Miy&amacr;&ndotb;alladev&imacr;, daughter of the Kar&ndotb;&amacr;&tdotb;a king, Jayakeçin. The story runs that the C&amacr;lukya king is to marry Kar&ndotb;asundar&imacr;, daughter of the Vidy&amacr;dhara king. The minister introduces her into the harem, and the king first sees her in a dream, then in a picture. He falls in love, and the queen is jealous; she breaks in on their meeting, and once assumes Kar&ndotb;asundar&imacr;&apos;s guise to present herself to the king. Next she tries to marry the king to a boy in Kar&ndotb;asundar&imacr;&apos;s clothes, but the minister adroitly substitutes the real for the feigned damsel, and the usual tidings of triumph abroad ends the play, which is a patent jumble of reminiscences of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, Har&sdotb;a, and R&amacr;jaçekhara.

<p>Madana B&amacr;lasarasvat&imacr;, preceptor of the Param&amacr;ra Arjunavarman of Dh&amacr;r&amacr;, wrote the <hi>Vijayaçr&imacr;</hi> or <hi>P&amacr;rij&amacr;tamañjar&imacr;</hi>,<note n=2 id=n256.2>Ed. E. Hultzsch, Leipzig, 1906; cf. GGA. 1908, pp. 98 ff.</note> a N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr; in four Acts, of which two are preserved on stone at Dh&amacr;r&amacr;. A garland falls on the breast of Arjunavarman after his victory over the C&amacr;lukya king, Bh&imacr;madeva II, and becomes a maiden, who is handed over to the charge of the Chamberlain. She is the daughter of the C&amacr;lukya, and the usual sequence of events leads to her wedlock with the king. There is doubtless a historical reference; the date of the play is early in the thirteenth century.

<pb n=257 id=pb257 facs="f:257"><p>Rather less commonplace is Mathur&amacr;d&amacr;sa&apos;s effort in the <hi>V&rdotb;&sdotb;abh&amacr;nuj&amacr;</hi><note n=1 id=n257.1>Ed. KM. 1895. The late <hi>M&rdotb;g&amacr;&nmacr;kalekh&amacr;</hi> of Viçvan&amacr;tha son of Trimaladeva, is summarized in Wilson, ii. 390 f.</note> to make a N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr; of the love of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a and R&amacr;dh&amacr;. He was a K&amacr;yastha of Suvar&ndotb;açekhara on the Ganges and Yamun&amacr;, and he uses the motive of the jealousy of R&amacr;dh&amacr; for a portrait of a lady which K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a has, but which turns out to be one of herself. A philosophic play is Narasi&ndota;ha&apos;s <hi><corr sic="Çivan&amacr;r&amacr;yanabhañjamahodaya">Çivan&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;abhañjamahodaya</corr></hi>, in honour of a prince of Keonjhor.

<p>The Sa&tdotb;&tdotb;aka with its demand for Pr&amacr;krit was too exacting for the average poet; we have only the <hi>&Amacr;nandasundar&imacr;</hi><note n=2 id=n257.2>Hultzsch, <hi>Reports</hi>, no. 2142. He wrote a N&amacr;&tdotb;aka, a Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a, a Prahasana, and the <hi>&Ddotb;amaruka</hi> in ten Ala&mdota;k&amacr;ras; <hi>Madras Catal.</hi> xxi. 8403 ff.</note> of the tedious Ghanaçy&amacr;ma, minister of the Mar&amacr;&tdotb;ha Tukkoj&imacr; and the <hi>Ç&rdotb;&nmacr;g&amacr;ramañjar&imacr;</hi><note n=3 id=n257.3>KM., Part 8, p. 51.</note> of the Almora poet Viçveçvara of the eighteenth century.


<div2 id=ch11.5 n=5>
<head><ab type=divNum>5.</ab> <hi>The Prakara&ndotb;a</hi></head>

<p>The example of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> induced few imitations, doubtless because would-be imitators had the sense to realize the appalling difficulties of producing anything worthy of setting beside that masterpiece. There is, however, a servile redaction of the same idea as that of the <hi><corr sic="M&amacr;latim&amacr;dhava">M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</corr></hi> of Bhavabh&umacr;ti in the <hi>Mallik&amacr;m&amacr;ruta</hi><note n=4 id=n257.4>Ed. Calcutta, 1878.</note> of Udda&ndotb;&ddotb;in or Udda&ndotb;&ddotb;an&amacr;tha, who has had the quite undeserved honour of being taken for Da&ndotb;&ddotb;in, but who was really no more than the court poet of the Zemindar of Kukku&tdotb;akro&ddotb;a or Calicut in the middle of the seventeenth century. The plot follows that of Bhavabh&umacr;ti&apos;s play almost slavishly. The magician Mand&amacr;kin&imacr; is eager to arrange a marriage between Mallik&amacr;, daughter of the minister of the Vidy&amacr;dhara king and M&amacr;ruta, son of the minister of the king of Kuntala. She arranges an interview between the two, who fall in love, but the match is disturbed by the desire of the king of Ceylon for Mallik&amacr;&apos;s hand. M&amacr;ruta&apos;s friend Kalaka&ndotb;&tdotb;ha is also in love with Ramayantik&amacr;. In Act III there is the usual temple scene, and a couple of elephants are let loose to frighten the two maidens and cause two rescues. Then M&amacr;ruta is told by an emissary of the king of Ceylon that Kalaka&ndotb;&tdotb;ha is dead, and is only saved from suicide by his friend&apos;s appearance. In <pb n=258 id=pb258 facs="f:258">Act V M&amacr;ruta tries conjuring up spirits; he finds Mallik&amacr; stolen by a R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa, rescues her, but is himself stolen, and finally overcomes the demon. But the marriage is to proceed, so that we have the elopement of M&amacr;ruta and Mallik&amacr;, and the usual deception of the bridegroom, while the other couple follow the example set and elope also. The inevitable second abduction of Mallik&amacr; takes place, with the necessary search for her, which at last is rewarded; all are united under Mand&amacr;kin&imacr;&apos;s protection, and the king and the parents accord their sanction.

<p>The work is metrically interesting, because the author shows a remarkable preference for the Vasantatilaka (118), and, while he is fond of the Ç&amacr;rd&umacr;lavikr&imacr;&ddotb;ita and employs a great variety of metres, he, unlike most later authors, uses freely the &Amacr;ry&amacr; in its different forms (74).

<p>We know also of Prakara&ndotb;as written by Jain writers.<note n=1 id=n258.1>Hultzsch, ZDMG. lxxv. 61 ff.</note> R&amacr;macandra, pupil of the great Hemacandra, who perished under the reign of Ajayap&amacr;la, nephew and successor of Hemacandra&apos;s patron, Kum&amacr;rap&amacr;la, between <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1173 and 1176, wrote, besides other plays, the <hi>Kaumud&imacr;mitr&amacr;&ndotb;anda</hi><note n=2 id=n258.2>Ed. Bh&amacr;vnagar, 1917.</note> in ten Acts. The work is wholly undramatic and is really the working up in the form of a play of a number of Kath&amacr; incidents, presenting a result not unlike the plot of a modern pantomime. We first learn of a merchant&apos;s son, Mitr&amacr;&ndotb;anda, who on the island of Varu&ndotb;a attains as wife the daughter, Kaumud&imacr;, of the head of a monastery, after he and his friend have freed from durance the Siddha king, cruelly nailed to a tree by Varu&ndotb;a. She reveals to him the fact that the ascetics are frauds, and that the fate of her husbands is normally to be flung into a pit under the nuptial chamber; in this case, however, attracted to her husband by the love charm he had received from Varu&ndotb;a, she agrees to flee with him and the treasure collected from former spouses to Ceylon. There the pair would have been in evil plight, since Mitr&amacr;&ndotb;anda is taken for a thief by the police, had he not cured from death by snake-bite the crown prince Lak&sdotb;m&imacr;pati with the aid of the magic spell given to him to revive the dead by the goddess J&amacr;&nmacr;gul&imacr; on the occasion of his marriage. The king in gratitude entrusts the pair to the minister, who, however, is enamoured of Kaumud&imacr; and anxious to get rid of her husband. The opportunity is given <pb n=259 id=pb259 facs="f:259">by a human sacrifice which a vassal of the king wishes to offer; Mitr&amacr;&ndotb;anda is sent by the minister with a letter intended to secure his being the victim, but luckily is recognized by Maitreya, his companion, who had won the vassal&apos;s favour by curing him by a magic herb. Kaumud&imacr; in the meantime is expelled from the minister&apos;s house by his jealous wife, and wanders until she meets Sumitr&amacr;, daughter of a merchant, and her family; all are captured by a prince of the aborigines Vajravarman, to whom also is brought one Makaranda, who turns out to be a friend of Mitr&amacr;&ndotb;anda. A letter from Lak&sdotb;m&imacr;pati arrives to ask for the welfare of Mitr&amacr;&ndotb;anda and Kaumud&imacr;, and the latter takes advantage of it to induce Vajravarman to celebrate the marriage of Makaranda and Sumitr&amacr;. The three then have an adventure at Ekacakr&amacr; with a K&amacr;p&amacr;lika, who induces the women to go into a subterranean cave, while he asks Mitr&amacr;&ndotb;anda&apos;s aid against a Vidy&amacr;dhara, described as eager after women. He breathes life into a corpse which takes a sword in its hand, but Mitr&amacr;&ndotb;anda by a magic formula induces it to strike the K&amacr;p&amacr;lika, who disappears. In Act IX Makaranda has to establish before Lak&sdotb;m&imacr;pati his claim to his own caravan, which a certain Naradatta claims; the dispute is settled by the appearance of Vajravarman and Mitr&amacr;&ndotb;anda, while Act X disposes of the piece by uniting husband and wife in the abode of the Siddha king. The work is, of course, wholly without interest other than that presented by so many marvels appealing to the sentiment of wonder in the audience. The author refers to Mur&amacr;ri in such a way as to suggest to Dr. Hultzsch<note n=1 id=n259.1>ZDMG. lxxv. 63. See above, chap. x. § 2.</note> his contemporaneity with him, but this <corr>is </corr>in no wise rendered necessary by the wording of the passage cited, and, secondly, would very badly agree with the fact that Ma&nmacr;kha knew and cites Mur&amacr;ri about <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1135, for it takes some time for an author to reach the stage of being treated as an authority.

<p>Another Jaina composition is the <hi>Prabuddharauhi&ndotb;eya</hi><note n=2 id=n259.2>Ed. Bh&amacr;vnagar, 1917.</note> of one R&amacr;mabhadra Muni, pupil of Jayaprabha S&umacr;ri, of the school of Deva S&umacr;ri, the famous writer on Ny&amacr;ya, who died in <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1169. It was written for performance in a temple of Yug&amacr;dideva, that is the T&imacr;rthakara &Rdotb;&sdotb;abha, on the occasion of a procession <pb n=260 id=pb260 facs="f:260">festival. It is in six Acts. In Act I Rauhi&ndotb;eya, who is a bold bandit, steals away Madanavat&imacr;, a married woman, while his helper, a Çabara, who speaks M&amacr;gadh&imacr;, keeps her lover at bay. In the next Act he dresses up as the mother of a youth Manoratha, and abducts him for the sake of his ornaments, terrifying the bystanders with a snake made out of rags. The next three Acts tell of the complaints of these robberies made to Çre&ndotb;ika of Magadha, and the efforts of his minister Abhayakum&amacr;ra to find the guilty man, ending ultimately in the arrest of the robber, who, however, stoutly maintains his innocence, though he fails in succeeding in winning his discharge. In Act VI women and musicians under the control of Bharata, a teacher of dancing, endeavour to deceive him into the belief that he is in heaven, and thus to win a confession of his misdeeds from him. But he sees through the play, for he remembers a verse which he had heard spoken by Vardham&amacr;na Sv&amacr;min before his captivity, in which the characteristics<note n=1 id=n260.1>Famous from the <hi>Nala</hi> onwards.</note> of the gods, freedom from perspiration, unfaded garlands, and feet that do not touch the ground, were set out. The miscreant thus is pronounced innocent, but, liberated, manifests his penitence by taking the king and the minister to the mount Vaibh&amacr;ra, in which are the treasures he has stolen and the missing boy and woman. The topic is one handled by Hemacandra in the matter illustrating his <hi>Yogaç&amacr;stra</hi>.

<p>Quite different is the character of the <hi>Mudritakumudacandra</hi><note n=2 id=n260.2>Ed. Benares, V&imacr;rasa&mdota;vat, 2432.</note> of Yaçaçcandra, son of Padmacandra, grandson of Dhanadeva of the Dharka&tdotb;a family, who was, it seems, the minister of a prince of Ç&amacr;kambhar&imacr; in Sap&amacr;dalak&sdotb;a. The play describes the controversy which took place in <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1124 between the Çvet&amacr;mbara Jaina teacher Deva S&umacr;ri, mentioned above, and the Digambara Kumudacandra, in which the latter was silenced, whence the title of the piece.


<div2 id=ch11.6 n=6>
<head><ab type=divNum>6.</ab> <hi>The Prahasana and the Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi></head>

<p>Popular as the Prahasana or farce must have been, we have in this period no example preserved certainly older than the <hi>La&tdotb;akamelaka</hi>,<note n=3 id=n260.3>Ed. KM. 1889. R. iii. 271, &amp;c., cites an <hi>&Amacr;nandakoça</hi>.</note> written in the earlier part of the twelfth century under Govindacandra of Kanyakubja by Ça&nmacr;khadhara Kavir&amacr;ja. The <pb n=261 id=pb261 facs="f:261">nature of the play is characteristic; the action passes at the house of the go-between Dantur&amacr;, to which come all sorts of people anxious to buy the affection of the fascinating Madanamañjar&imacr;. Comic relief is further provided by the arrival of doctor Jantuketu to extract a fish-bone from the damsel&apos;s throat. He is perfectly incompetent and his methods absurd, but they affect their purpose indirectly, since, through laughing at his antics, the bone is happily dislodged. The bargaining of the lovers is satirized, and the marriage which is actually arranged is one between the go-between herself and a Digambara, a type doubtless sure to raise a laugh.

<p>Of much later date is the well-known <hi>Dh&umacr;rtasam&amacr;gama</hi><note n=1 id=n261.1>Ed. in Lassen&apos;s <hi>Anth. Sanscr.</hi>, Bonn, 1838. Cf. Harapras&amacr;d, <hi><corr sic=Nepa>Nepal</corr> Catal.</hi>, p. xxxvii.</note> of Jyotir&imacr;çvara Kaviçekhara, son of Dhaneçvara, grandson of R&amacr;meçvara, of the family of Dh&imacr;reçvara who wrote under the Vijayanagara king Narasi&ndota;ha (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1487&ndash;1507), though a Nepalese manuscript makes his father Dh&imacr;rasi&ndota;ha and his patron Harasi&ndota;ha, who has been identified, implausibly, with Harisi&ndota;ha of Simraon (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1324). The first part of the play relates the contest of the religious mendicant Viçvanagara and his pupil Dur&amacr;c&amacr;ra, whose names are significant, over the beautiful Ana&nmacr;gasen&amacr;; the pupil has every reason to complain, since it was he who saw the fair one and confided his love to his master, who meanly seeks to secure the damsel&apos;s favour in lieu. She insists on the matter being referred to arbitration, and in the second part the Brahmin Asajj&amacr;ti, Impure Race, an expert at dealing with delicate matters of casuistry, undertakes the duty, and wisely decides to impound the damsel for himself, though, while he is deliberating, his Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka seeks to secure the prize for himself. The case over, the barber M&umacr;lan&amacr;çaka, Root Destroyer, turns up to demand payment of a debt from Ana&nmacr;gasen&amacr;. She refers him to Asajj&amacr;ti, who pays him with his pupil&apos;s purse; he then demands the barber&apos;s care; the latter ties him up and leaves him to be rescued by the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka.

<p>Very popular is Jagad&imacr;çvara&apos;s <hi>H&amacr;sy&amacr;r&ndotb;ava</hi>.<note n=2 id=n261.2>Ed. Calcutta, 1896. Cf. Wilson, ii. 408 f.</note> The king, Anayasindhu, Ocean of Misrule, is devastated because all goes ill in his realm: Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;las make shoes, not Brahmins, wives are chaste, husbands constant, and the good respected. He asks his minister where best he can study the character of his people, and is <pb n=262 id=pb262 facs="f:262">advised to go to the house of the go-between, Bandhur&amacr;, who presents to him her daughter, M&rdotb;g&amacr;&nmacr;kalekh&amacr;. The court <corr sic=chaplin>chaplain</corr> enters with his pupil, and <corr>they </corr>are attracted to the damsel. A comic doctor is called in for Bandhur&amacr;, who feels ill; his remedies are worse than the disease, and he has to run away. A series of other figures are introduced. Then a barber, who has cut a patient; the latter demands damages, but is non-suited; then comes the chief of police, S&amacr;dhuhi&ndota;sika, Terror to the Good, the comic general Ra&ndotb;ajambuka, the astrologer Mah&amacr;y&amacr;trika, who indicates as the time for a journey the conjunction of stars presaging death. The king disappears at the end of the first Act; the second deals with the efforts of the chaplain and his pupil to obtain the damsel; but rivals come in the form of another man of religion and his pupil; finally the two older reprobates secure the damsel, while the boys content themselves with Bandhur&amacr;, who is delighted with the turn of events. But the celebration of these double marriages is left to another holy man, Mah&amacr;nindaka, who also desires to share the hetaera. The date of the piece is unknown, as is that of the <hi>Kautukasarvasva</hi><note n=1 id=n262.1>Ed. Calcutta, 1828; Wilson, ii. 410 f.</note> of Gop&imacr;n&amacr;tha Cakravartin, written for the autumn festival of the Durg&amacr;p&umacr;j&amacr; in Bengal. It is more amusing and less vulgar than most of these pieces; the king, Kalivatsala, who is licentious, addicted to every kind of vice, and a lover of hemp juice, ill-treats the virtuous Brahmin Saty&amacr;c&amacr;ra, who finds that everything is wrong in the state, even the people being valiant in oppression, skilled in falsehood, and persevering only in contempt for the pious. The general is valiant: he can cleave a roll of butter with his blade, and trembles at the approach of a mosquito. Play is made with the immoralities recounted in the Pur&amacr;&ndotb;as; the objections of the &Rdotb;&sdotb;is to vice are put down to the fact that they censured in others what they themselves were too old to enjoy. The king proclaims free love, but becomes himself involved in a dispute over a hetaera. He is summoned back to the queen, which so annoys the hetaera that every one hastens to console her, and the king, obligingly to please her, banishes all Brahmins from the realm.

<p>The <hi>Dh&umacr;rtanartaka</hi><note n=2 id=n262.2>Wilson, ii. 407.</note> of S&amacr;mar&amacr;ja D&imacr;k&sdotb;ita is of the seventeenth century. It deals with one Mureçvara, who, though a Çaiva ascetic, is a devotee of a dancing girl whom he entrusts to his <pb n=263 id=pb263 facs="f:263">pupils on having to go away. They seek to secure the favours of the damsel and, failing in this, denounce him to the king, but P&amacr;p&amacr;c&amacr;ra, Bad Conduct, is merely amused and allows the saint to keep the damsel. Rather earlier is the <hi>Kautukaratn&amacr;kara</hi><note n=1 id=n263.1>Cappeller, <hi>Gurup&umacr;j&amacr;kaumud&imacr;</hi>, pp. 62 f.</note> by the chaplain of Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a M&amacr;&ndotb;ikyadeva of Bh&umacr;luy&amacr;, which centres in the carrying off of the queen, though the chief of police sleeps beside her to guard her, and the adventures of the hetaera who is to take her place at the spring festival.

<p>The Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a, despite its antiquity, attested by the theory, is not represented early in the history of the drama. To V&amacr;mana Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a B&amacr;&ndotb;a, about <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1500, we owe the <hi>Ç&rdotb;&nmacr;g&amacr;rabh&umacr;&sdotb;a&ndotb;a</hi>,<note n=2 id=n263.2>Ed. KM. 1896. R. iii. 248 gives an unknown <hi>Ç&rdotb;&nmacr;g&amacr;ramañjar&imacr;</hi> as a specimen. See p. 185, n. 3.</note> which is typical of the class. The chief Vi&tdotb;a, Vil&amacr;saçekhara, comes out to pay a visit to the hetaera Ana&nmacr;gamañjar&imacr; on the evening of the spring festival. He goes into the street of the hetaerae, and takes part in a series of imaginary conversations, giving the answers himself to his own questions, or pretending to listen to some one out of sight and then repeating the answers. He describes the hetaerae, ram-fights, cock-fights, boxing, a quarrel between two rivals, the different stages of the day, and the pleasures of the festival. Much on the same lines is the <hi>Ç&rdotb;&nmacr;g&amacr;ratilaka</hi><note n=3 id=n263.3>Ed. KM. 1894.</note> or <hi>Ayy&amacr;bh&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi> of R&amacr;mabhadra D&imacr;k&sdotb;ita, which was written to rival the <hi>Vasantatilaka</hi><note n=4 id=n263.4>Ed. Madras, 1874.</note> or <hi>Amm&amacr;bh&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi> of Varad&amacr;c&amacr;rya or Amm&amacr;l &Amacr;c&amacr;rya, the Vai&sdotb;&ndotb;ava. The play was written for performance at the festival of the marriage of M&imacr;n&amacr;k&sdotb;&imacr;, the deity of Madur&amacr;. Bhuja&nmacr;gaçekhara, the hero, is vexed at the departure of his beloved Hem&amacr;&nmacr;g&imacr;, but is assured of meeting her again, despite her return to her husband. He makes the usual promenade in the hetaerae&apos;s street, has the usual imaginary conversations and describes the ordinary sights, including snake charmers and magic shows of gods and their mountains and so forth. Finally he succeeds in rejoining Hem&amacr;&nmacr;g&imacr;. We have similar lengthy descriptions in the <hi>Ç&amacr;rad&amacr;tilaka</hi><note n=5 id=n263.5>Wilson, ii. 384.</note> of Ça&nmacr;kara, who places the scene in the feigned city of uproar, Kol&amacr;halapura, and whose satire extends to the Ja&nmacr;gamas or Çaivas and the Vai&sdotb;&ndotb;avas. Nall&amacr; Kavi (<hi>c.</hi> <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1700) is responsible for the <hi>Ç&rdotb;&nmacr;g&amacr;rasarvasva</hi>,<note n=6 id=n263.6>Ed. KM. 1902.</note> <pb n=264 id=pb264 facs="f:264">which deals with Ana&nmacr;gaçekhara, who has to part from his beloved Kanakalat&amacr;, but he is helped to meet her by the advent of an elephant which terrifies all the others in the street, but is worshipped by the lover as Ga&ndotb;eça and Çiva&apos;s answer to his prayer for help. A slight variant is presented by the <hi>Rasasadana</hi><note n=1 id=n264.1>Ed. KM. 1893; JRAS. 1907, p. 729.</note> by a Yuvar&amacr;ja from Ko&tdotb;ili&nmacr;ga in Kerala; the hero here is a chief Vi&tdotb;a who has promised his friend Mand&amacr;raka to look after his loved one for him. He goes about with her to a temple, and then to his house; wanders out into the street, talks and describes at large, and finally, after accepting the invitation of a lady from a neighbouring town to pay her a visit, goes back home to find the lovers united again.

<p>The Prahasanas and Bh&amacr;&ndotb;as are hopelessly coarse from any modern Europe standpoint, but they are certainly often in a sense artistic productions. The writers have not the slightest desire to be simple; in the Prahasana their tendency to run riot is checked, as verse is confined to erotic stanzas and descriptions, and some action exists. In the Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a, on the other hand, the right to describe is paramount, and the poets give themselves full rein. They exhibit in this comic monologue precisely the same defects as are seen in the contemporary N&amacr;&tdotb;aka; all is reduced to a study of stylistic effects, especially as regards sound. They rejoice in exhibiting their large command of the Sanskrit vocabulary, as obtained from the lexica, and the last thing desired is simplicity or perspicuity. Nothing more clearly indicates the close connexion of the two styles than the fact that we find a type of mixed Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a in the <hi>Mukund&amacr;nanda</hi><note n=2 id=n264.2><hi>Ibid.</hi>, 1889.</note> of K&amacr;ç&imacr;pati Kavir&amacr;ja, who is certainly not earlier than the thirteenth century. The adventures recounted by Bhuja&nmacr;gaçekhara, the hero, allude also to the sports of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a and the cowherdesses, a double allusion which explains the difficulty of the style asserted by the author.


<div2 id=ch11.7 n=7>
<head><ab type=divNum>7.</ab> <hi>Minor Dramatic Types</hi></head>

<p>The Vy&amacr;yoga seems not to have been often written, despite the example of Bh&amacr;sa. The <hi>P&amacr;rthapar&amacr;krama</hi><note n=3 id=n264.3>Ed. in <hi>Gaekwad&apos;s Oriental Series</hi>, no. iv. 1917.</note> of Prahl&amacr;danadeva falls in the period between <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1163 and half a century <pb n=265 id=pb265 facs="f:265">later, for its author was the brother of Dh&amacr;r&amacr;var&sdotb;a, son of Yaçodhavala, and lord of Candr&amacr;vat&imacr;, whose reign ranks honourably in the records of the Param&amacr;ras of Mount &Amacr;bu. It was acted on the occasion of the festival of the investment of Acaleçvara, the tutelary deity of Mount &Amacr;bu with the sacred thread, and claims to exhibit the sentiment of excitement (<hi>d&imacr;ptarasa</hi>). The story, taken from the Vir&amacr;&tdotb;a Parvan of the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;rata</hi>, is the well-known one of the recovery by Arjuna of the cows of Vir&amacr;&tdotb;a, raided by the Kauravas, and the defeat of the raiders. It accords, therefore, well with the definition in the text-books, for the struggle which it describes is not caused by a woman, the feminine interest is restricted to the colourless figures of Draupad&imacr; and Uttar&amacr;, and the hero is neither a divine being nor a king. The poet, whose fame as a warrior and whose princely generosity are extolled by Someçvara, claims for his poetry the merits of smooth composition and clearness, and these may be admitted, though the play does not rise above mediocrity. Technically the play is of some interest, in so far as after the N&amacr;nd&imacr; the Sth&amacr;paka enters, recites a couple of stanzas, and then an actor comes on the stage who addresses him, but is answered by the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra; apparently the two terms were here synonymous to the author of the play or the later tradition. Moreover the final benediction is allotted, not to Arjuna, the hero of the play, but to V&amacr;sava, who appears at the close of the play in a celestial chariot in company with the Apsarases to bestow applause and blessing. Prahl&amacr;dana wrote other works, of which some verses are preserved in the anthologies, and must have been a man of considerable ability and merit.

<p>The <hi>Kir&amacr;t&amacr;rjun&imacr;ya</hi><note n=1 id=n265.1>Ed., with the other five plays, <hi>Gaekwad&apos;s Oriental Series</hi>, no. viii. 1918.</note> is a Vy&amacr;yoga based on Bh&amacr;ravi&apos;s epic by Vatsar&amacr;ja, who calls himself the minister of Paramardideva of K&amacr;lañjara, who reigned from <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1163 to 1203. Vatsar&amacr;ja is interesting as a good specimen of the poet of decadence; we have from him six plays illustrating each a different type of drama. The <hi>Karp&umacr;racaritra</hi> is a Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a of orthodox type; the gambler Karp&umacr;raka describes in monologue his revelry, gambling, and love. The <hi>H&amacr;syac&umacr;&ddotb;&amacr;ma&ndotb;i</hi> is a farce in one act which has as its hero an &Amacr;c&amacr;rya of the Bh&amacr;gavata school, styled Jñ&amacr;nar&amacr;çi, who professes the possession of supernatural knowledge, <pb n=266 id=pb266 facs="f:266">enabling him to trace lost articles and buried treasure, and who carries out his professions by various tricks and fooleries. He has an irresistible pupil, who is sadly lacking in respect for his teacher, and delights in interpreting literally his remarks. The <hi>Kir&amacr;t&amacr;rjun&imacr;ya</hi> has no special merit, but is technically interesting; after a N&amacr;nd&imacr; celebrating Çiva&apos;s consort, the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra enters, immediately followed by the Sth&amacr;paka, who insists on his reciting a further N&amacr;nd&imacr; of the trident of Çiva, on the score that the play is heroic in sentiment and should be appropriately introduced. This play was produced later than the other five, for it came out under Trailokyavarmadeva, successor of Paramardi. The other three plays, an &Imacr;h&amacr;m&rdotb;ga, &Ddotb;ima, and Samavak&amacr;ra will be noticed below.

<p>We have also a Vy&amacr;yoga by Viçvan&amacr;tha, the <hi>Saugandhik&amacr;hara&ndotb;a</hi>,<note n=1 id=n266.1>Ed. KM. 1902. Cf. SD. 514.</note> of about <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1316, which deals with Bh&imacr;ma&apos;s visit to Kubera&apos;s lake to fetch water-lilies for Draupad&imacr;, his struggle first with Hanumant and then with the Yak&sdotb;as, and his final victory; the P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;avas meet at Kubera&apos;s home and Draupad&imacr; obtains her desired flowers. Of unknown date is the <hi>Dhana&mdota;jayavijaya</hi><note n=2 id=n266.2>Ed. KM. 1885; Wilson, ii. 374.</note> of K&amacr;ñcana Pa&ndotb;&ddotb;ita, son of N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, which deals with the prowess of Arjuna in the defeat of Duryodhana and the Kauravas when they raid the cattle of Vir&amacr;&tdotb;a, evidently a special favourite of the dramatic authors. The description of the contest in which Arjuna uses magic weapons is given by Indra and a couple of his celestial entourage; the play ends with the giving to Arjuna&apos;s son Uttar&amacr;, daughter of the king Vir&amacr;&tdotb;a, in marriage. A manuscript of <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1328 is extant of the <hi>Bh&imacr;mavikramavy&amacr;yoga</hi><note n=3 id=n266.3>Bendall, <hi>Brit. Mus. Catal.</hi>, <corr sic="p.">no.</corr> 273.</note> of Mok&sdotb;&amacr;ditya, while the <hi>Nirbhayabh&imacr;ma</hi><note n=4 id=n266.4>Hultzsch, ZDMG. lxxv. 62 f.</note> of R&amacr;macandra belongs to the second half of the twelfth century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi>

<p>Of the type &Imacr;h&amacr;m&rdotb;ga we have a specimen by Vatsar&amacr;ja in the <hi>Rukmi&ndotb;&imacr;hara&ndotb;a</hi>, which in four Acts deals with the success of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a in depriving Çiçup&amacr;la of Cedi of Rukmi&ndotb;&imacr;, his promised bride. The play opens with a dialogue between the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra who enters, after a N&amacr;nd&imacr; in a couple of stanzas has been pronounced, and the Sth&amacr;paka, which tells us that the play was performed at moonrise during the festival of Cakrasv&amacr;min. The action of the play is languid, and the author has had trouble to <pb n=267 id=pb267 facs="f:267">spread it out over four Acts; the characters are conventional; Rukmi&ndotb;&imacr; the heroine is a nonentity, and neither Çiçup&amacr;la nor Rukmin, the objects of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a&apos;s enmity, has any distinct characterization. K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a goes into a state of trance on the stage in Act IV to produce the presence of T&amacr;rk&sdotb;ya to enable him to complete his victory. The female character, Subuddhi, uses Sanskrit in lieu of Pr&amacr;krit.

<p>Other dramas of this type<note n=1 id=n267.1>Konow, ID. p. 114.</note> are the late <hi>V&imacr;ravijaya</hi> of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;amiçra, and the <hi>Sarvavinodan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi> of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a Avadh&umacr;ta Gha&tdotb;ik&amacr;çata Mah&amacr;kavi.

<p>To Vatsar&amacr;ja also we owe a specimen of the &Ddotb;ima, the <hi>Tripurad&amacr;ha</hi> in four Acts, which describes the destruction of the capital of Tripur&amacr;sura by Çiva. The idea of writing such a piece was doubtless given by the mention of a work of this name in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, and the play is extremely insipid; the numerous figures who crowd the stage are lifeless, and the celestial weapons which overcome the Asuras lack reality; the convenances are duly observed; Kum&amacr;ra in the full flight of his triumph is stayed by his father&apos;s commands, and Çukra delightedly records this act of courtesy on the part of the god, despite his anger with the D&amacr;navas. The play closes with the homage paid by the gods and the seers alike to Maheça, who is bashful, and the benediction is pronounced by Indra, not by the hero of the drama.

<p>Other &Ddotb;imas are late; thus we have one by the ubiquitous Ghanaçy&amacr;ma, the <hi>K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;avijaya</hi> of Ve&nmacr;ka&tdotb;avarada, and the <hi>Manmathonmathana</hi><note n=2 id=n267.2>Schmidt, ZDMG. lxiii. 409 f<corr>.</corr>, 623 f.</note> of R&amacr;ma, a drama of 1820.

<p>Vatsar&amacr;ja is also responsible for a Samavak&amacr;ra, the <hi>Samudramathana</hi>, in three Acts, which again owes its existence doubtless to the naming of a work with a kindred title in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> as the model of a Samavak&amacr;ra. Here again we find after a N&amacr;nd&imacr; of two stanzas the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra and the Sth&amacr;paka engaged in conversation. The former and his eleven brothers seek simultaneously to attain wealth; how is this possible? The Sth&amacr;paka suggests either homage to Paramardi or to the ocean, a statement duly caught up by a voice behind the stage, which asserts that from the ocean comes the fulfilment of wishes, followed by the entry of Padmaka. The play is based on the legend of the <pb n=268 id=pb268 facs="f:268">churning of the ocean by the gods and demons with its sequel, the winning by Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u of Lak&sdotb;m&imacr; and the gaining of other desired objects by the participators in the enterprise. The treatment fails to rise above the commonplace; Lak&sdotb;m&imacr; appears in Act I with Lajj&amacr; and Dh&rdotb;ti, her companions, in the normal occupation of gazing on a picture of her beloved, who later appears also on the scene. The artificiality of the type is proved by the absence of other dramas of this kind.

<p>The A&nmacr;ka, or one-Act play, is represented by very few specimens. The term is often applied to denote a play within a play, in the <hi>B&amacr;lar&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> the name Prek&sdotb;a&ndotb;aka is applied generally to such plays. The same name is also given to the <hi>Unmattar&amacr;ghava</hi><note n=1 id=n268.1>Ed. KM. 1889.</note> of Bh&amacr;skara Kavi, of unknown date, though the Vidy&amacr;ra&ndotb;ya mentioned in it may be S&amacr;ya&ndotb;a or his contemporary. The play is a stupid imitation of Act IV of the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>; while R&amacr;ma and Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a pursue the golden gazelle, S&imacr;t&amacr;, by the curse of Durv&amacr;sas, is changed into a gazelle herself; R&amacr;ma returns and wanders miserably in search of her, but finally wins her by the help of Agastya.

<p>The term Prek&sdotb;a&ndotb;aka is also applied to the <hi>K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;&amacr;bhyudaya</hi> of Lokan&amacr;tha Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a, written for the raintime procession of the Lord of Hastigiri, Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u, in K&amacr;ñc&imacr;. A number of modern plays, which may be styled A&nmacr;kas, are also known, while the <hi>Çarmi&sdotb;&tdotb;h&amacr;yay&amacr;ti</hi> in the <hi>S&amacr;hityadarpa&ndotb;a</hi> may be identical with the work of that name by K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a Kavi.<note n=2 id=n268.2>Konow, ID. p. 118.</note>

<p>Of the types of Upar&umacr;paka, other than the N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr; and Sa&tdotb;&tdotb;aka, there are very few represented, and these only obviously written in accord with the text-book definitions. Thus R&umacr;pa Gosv&amacr;min has left a Bh&amacr;&ndotb;ik&amacr;, the <hi>D&amacr;nakelikaumud&imacr;</hi>,<note n=3 id=n268.3>Ed. Murçid&amacr;b&amacr;d, 1881 f.</note> among his varied efforts to adapt the drama to the tenets of his faith, and the <hi>Subhadr&amacr;hara&ndotb;a</hi><note n=4 id=n268.4>Ed. KM. 1888.</note> of M&amacr;dhava, son of the Ma&ndotb;&ddotb;aleçvara Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a and Indumat&imacr;, and brother of Harihara, styles itself a Çr&imacr;gadita. As it describes itself in terms similar to those used in the <hi>S&amacr;hityadarpa&ndotb;a</hi>, it is quite possibly posterior to that work, and, on the other hand, there exists a manuscript of <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1610. The story of the play is the old legend of the elopement of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a&apos;s friend Arjuna with Subhadr&amacr;, whom he meets <pb n=269 id=pb269 facs="f:269">by going to her father&apos;s house as a beggar. The presence of a narrative verse has suggested comparison with a shadow-drama, but for this there is inadequate evidence.


<div2 id=ch11.8 n=8>
<head><ab type=divNum>8.</ab> <hi>The Shadow Play</hi></head>

<p>It is extremely doubtful at what date the shadow-drama appeared in India; the first play which we can be certain was represented in this way is the <hi>Dharm&amacr;bhyudaya</hi><note n=1 id=n269.1>See above, ch. ii. § 4.</note> of Meghaprabh&amacr;c&amacr;rya, which in the stage direction mentions once clearly a puppet (<hi>putraka</hi>) and calls itself a Ch&amacr;y&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;yaprabandha. Unluckily the age of this work does not seem to be ascertainable with any certainty.

<p>It is natural to suggest, as did Pischel, that the <hi>D&umacr;t&amacr;&nmacr;gada</hi> of Subha&tdotb;a, which is styled a Ch&amacr;y&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka, really was a shadow play. On the other hand, R&amacr;jendral&amacr;lamitra<note n=2 id=n269.2><hi>Bikaner Catal.</hi>, p. 251. It is trs., Gray, JAOS. xxxii. 59 ff. The play borrows from the <hi>B&amacr;lar&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> (ix. 58 f. = verses 52 f.), and the <hi>Mah&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>.</note> suggested that the drama was perhaps simply intended as an entr&apos;acte, and this may be justified on the interpretation of the term of drama in the form of a shadow: i.e. reduced to the minimum for representation in such a form. The play itself unluckily contains nothing to help us to a decision as to its real character. It was represented in <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1243 in honour of the dead king <corr sic="Kum&amacr;rapala">Kum&amacr;rap&amacr;la</corr> at the court of Tribhuvanap&amacr;la, a Caulukya of A&ndotb;ahilap&amacr;&tdotb;aka, and it has come down to us in various forms. A longer and shorter recension may be distinguished, though not very definitely; in the longer form occur epic verses, and an introduction is prefixed in thirty-nine stanzas, partly placed in the mouths of R&amacr;ma and Hanumant, describing the finding of S&imacr;t&amacr;&apos;s hiding-place. The story is the simple one of A&nmacr;gada&apos;s mission as an ambassador to R&amacr;va&ndotb;a to demand back S&imacr;t&amacr;; R&amacr;va&ndotb;a endeavours to persuade A&nmacr;gada that S&imacr;t&amacr; is in love with him. A&nmacr;gada is not deceived, and leaves R&amacr;va&ndotb;a with threats, and we learn shortly afterwards that R&amacr;va&ndotb;a has met his doom. The merits of the work are negligible.

<p>We have no other play of which we can say with even the slightest plausibility that it was a real shadow-drama. There are three works by Vy&amacr;sa Çr&imacr;r&amacr;madeva from the fifteenth <pb n=270 id=pb270 facs="f:270">century, his patrons being Kalacuri princes of Raypur. The first, the <hi>Subhadr&amacr;pari&ndotb;ayana</hi>, produced under Brahmadeva or Haribrahmadeva, deals with the threadworn topic of the winning of <corr sic="Arjuna&apos;a">Arjuna&apos;s</corr> bride; the second, the <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;bhyudaya</hi> appeared under the Mah&amacr;r&amacr;&ndotb;a Meru, and deals with the conquest of La&nmacr;k&amacr;, the fire ordeal of S&imacr;t&amacr;, and the return to Ayodhy&amacr;; the third, the <hi>P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;av&amacr;bhyudaya</hi>, written under Ra&ndotb;amalladeva, describes in two Acts Draupad&imacr;&apos;s birth and marriage. But that these were really shadow-dramas is not indicated by anything save the title, for they resemble ordinary dramas in all other respects. The <hi>S&amacr;vitr&imacr;carita</hi> of Ça&nmacr;karal&amacr;la, son of Maheçvara, calls itself a Ch&amacr;y&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka, but the work, written in 1882, is an ordinary drama, and Lüders<note n=1 id=n270.1>SBAW. 1916, pp. 698 ff.</note> is doubtless right in recognizing that these are not shadow dramas at all. On the other hand, he adds to the list the <hi>Harid&umacr;ta</hi>, which tells the story given in the <hi>D&umacr;tav&amacr;kya</hi> of Bh&amacr;sa of the mission of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a to the P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;avas&apos; enemies to seek to attain peace. This drama, however, does not describe itself as a Ch&amacr;y&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka, and the argument is, accordingly, without value. But what is most significant, there is no allusion to this sort of drama in the theory which suggests that its introduction was decidedly late.


<div2 id=ch11.9 n=9>
<head><ab type=divNum>9.</ab> <hi>Dramas of Irregular Type</hi></head>

<p>Professor Lüders<note n=2 id=n270.2><hi>Loc. cit.</hi></note> adds to the almost non-existing list of shadow dramas, the <hi>Mah&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>. He does this on the strength of the fact that it is written mainly in verse, with little of prose; that the verse is decidedly at times of the narrative as opposed to the dramatic type; there is no Pr&amacr;krit; the number of persons appearing is large, and there is no Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, and these characteristics are found in the <hi>D&umacr;t&amacr;&nmacr;gada</hi>, which is a Ch&amacr;y&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka in name. The argument is clearly inadequate in the absence of any real evidence, and the <hi>Mah&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi> can be explained in other ways.

<p>The history of this play is curious. It is preserved in two recensions, one in nine or ten Acts redacted by Madhus&umacr;dana and one in fourteen by D&amacr;modaramiçra. The stories given by the commentator Mohanad&amacr;sa and the <hi>Bhojaprabandha</hi>, agree in effect that the play was put together by order of Bhoja from <pb n=271 id=pb271 facs="f:271">fragments found on rocks, which were fished out of the sea; the tradition was that Hanumant himself wrote the work, which, therefore, is called <hi>Hanumann&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, but that to please V&amacr;lm&imacr;ki, who recognized that it would eclipse his great epic, the generous ape permitted his rival to cast into the sea the drama which he had inscribed on the rocks. This certainly suggests that some old matter was embodied in the play, and this view has been strengthened by the fact that &Amacr;nandavardhana cites three verses out of the play, but without giving any source, as also do R&amacr;jaçekhara in the <hi>K&amacr;vyam&imacr;m&amacr;&ndota;s&amacr;</hi> and Dhanika in his <hi>Daçar&umacr;p&amacr;valoka</hi>, so that the evidence is not of much worth, for the work, as we have it, plagiarizes shamelessly from the dramas of Bhavabh&umacr;ti, Mur&amacr;ri, and R&amacr;jaçekhara, and even from Jayadeva&apos;s <hi>Prasannar&amacr;ghava</hi>, unless we are to suppose that in the latter case the borrowing is the other way. The question which is the earlier of the two recensions is unsolved; the one with fewer Acts has 730 as opposed to 581 verses, and of these about 300 are in common.<note n=1 id=n271.1>For the slightly different legend of Madhus&umacr;dana&mdash;current in Bengal&mdash;see SBAW. 1916, pp. 704 ff. The number of verses varies greatly in the manuscripts. The apparent citation by name in DR. comm. ii. 1 is only in some manuscripts.</note>

<p>There is a brief benediction, but no prologue, and narrative follows down to the arrival of R&amacr;ma at Mithil&amacr; for the winning of S&imacr;t&amacr; by breaking the bow of Çiva; this part of the action is given in a dialogue between S&imacr;t&amacr;, Janaka, R&amacr;ma, and others. More narrative leads up to a scene with Paraçur&amacr;ma, then narrative follow to S&imacr;t&amacr;&apos;s marriage. Act II is undramatic, being a highly flavoured description of S&imacr;t&amacr;&apos;s love passages with R&amacr;ma. Act III again is mainly descriptive, carrying the story down to the departure of R&amacr;ma and Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a in chase of M&amacr;r&imacr;ca in deer shape. Act IV carries the story down to R&amacr;ma&apos;s return to the deserted hut; in Act V R&amacr;ma seeks S&imacr;t&amacr; and sends Hanumant to La&nmacr;k&amacr;; in the next Act Hanumant consoles S&imacr;t&amacr; and returns; in Act VII the host of apes crosses the ocean; in Act VIII, which is much more dramatic than usual, we have A&nmacr;gada&apos;s mission to R&amacr;va&ndotb;a; and the rest of the Acts drag out the wearisome details of the conflict, often in so imperfect a manner as to be unintelligible without knowledge of the <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> and the earlier dramas. The two versions generally correspond, but not with any precision in detail.

<pb n=272 id=pb272 facs="f:272"><p>The exact purpose of such a play is not obvious, but it looks rather like a literary <hi>tour de force</hi>, possibly in preparation for some form of performance<note n=1 id=n272.1>Lüders&apos;s attempt to read, in Madhus&umacr;dana&apos;s recension only, <hi>saubhy&amacr;&hdotb;</hi>, shadow players, is clearly absurd; ZDMG. lxxiv. 142, n. 3.</note> at which the dialogue was plentifully eked out by narrative by the director and the other actors. It is incredible, however, that, as we have it, it can ever have served any practical end, and its chief value, such as it is, is to reflect possibly the form of drama of a period when the drama had not yet completely emerged from the epic condition. We should thus have the old work of the Granthikas reinforced by putting part of the dialogue in the mouths of real actors. But it would be dangerous in so late a production to lay any stress on the possibility of deriving hence evidence for the growth of the early drama. It is, however, legitimate to note that there are similarities between the type and that of the performance of a Tamil version of the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>.<note n=2 id=n272.2>Lévi, TI. i. 244; G. Devèze, <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, Paris, 1888.</note> The curious number of Acts has been suggested as indicating that the original was otherwise divided than a normal drama, but on this it would be dangerous to lay much stress.

<p>The metre of the play exhibits the extraordinary fact of 253 Ç&amacr;rd&umacr;lavikr&imacr;&ddotb;ita stanzas to 109 Çloka, 83 Vasantatilaka, 77 Sragdhar&amacr;, 59 M&amacr;lin&imacr;, and 55 Indravajr&amacr; type. This fact, in the version of Madhus&umacr;dana, is sufficient to show how far we are removed from anything primitive.

<p>The type of the <hi>Mah&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi> may be compared with the <hi>G&imacr;tagovinda</hi>,<note n=3 id=n272.3>Lévi, TI. i. 235 ff.; Keith, <hi>Sansk. Lit.</hi>, pp. 121 ff.</note> which, written by Jayadeva under Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;asena in the twelfth century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi>, exhibits songs sung by K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, R&amacr;dh&amacr;, and her companion, intermingled with lyric stanzas of the poet, describing their position, or the emotions excited, and addressing prayer to K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a. The work is a poem, and can be enjoyed simply as such, but it is also capable of a quasi-dramatic presentment. It reveals a highly-developed outcome of the simple Y&amacr;tr&amacr;s of the K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a religion.

<p>In the <hi>Gop&amacr;lakelicandrik&amacr;</hi><note n=4 id=n272.4>Ed. W. Caland, Amsterdam, 1917. Cf. ZDMG. lxxiv. 138 ff.; IA. xlix, 232 f.</note> of R&amacr;mak&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a of Gujar&amacr;t, of unknown date, but certainly later than the <hi>Mah&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi> and the <hi>Bh&amacr;gavata Pur&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi>, we have an irregular drama whose form has <pb n=273 id=pb273 facs="f:273">excited a large number of conjectures, including the inevitable but absurd solution of a shadow play. The nearest parallel of those suggested in this case and in that of the <hi>Mah&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi><note n=1 id=n273.1>The Sw&amacr;ng, unlike the play, is metrical throughout; R. C. Temple, <hi>Legends of the Panjab</hi>, I. viii, 121.</note> is the Sw&amacr;ng of North-West India, in that the actors recite the narrative parts as well as take part in the dialogue. There seems no special reason to doubt that the same thing might have taken place in this case, though it is conceivable that it was an imitation of the type of entertainment in which a Brahmin says the spoken parts, while his small pupils go through the action of the drama, possibly a far-off parallel to the Çaubhikas as far as the action is concerned. But it is quite possibly no more than a literary exercise, and the same judgement may apply to the <hi>Mah&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>. The fact that both talk as if there were action is no sign of real representation. The modern written drama is full of stage directions, though it may never succeed in obtaining a performance on the stage, and we have not the slightest reason to deny the existence of the literary drama in India.<note n=2 id=n273.2>In Greece, despite the great advantages of a public representation, plays to be read only arose early; Aristotle, <hi>Rhetoric</hi>, iii. 12. 2. Most of the dramas of the last few years seem literary.</note> The piece is highly stylized, and could only be understood, if at all, by a cultivated audience.

<p>The connexion of the play with the <hi>Hanumann&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi> is expressly admitted in the prologue; the actress, who enters with the usual inquiry in Pr&amacr;krit as to the business to be undertaken, is informed by the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra that this is not a case for Pr&amacr;krit, but for Sanskrit, alone worthy of an audience of Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u devotees. The actress, not unnaturally, asks how a drama is possible without Pr&amacr;krit, to be comforted by the parallel of the <hi>Hanumann&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>. This seems a clear enough indication that the work is a literary exercise rather than a genuine stage play representing a living form of dramatic representation. From an ordinary play it is distinguished by the fact that we have stanzas and prose of merely narrative character, and we learn from one passage that these parts are directed by the S&umacr;caka to the spectator. The S&umacr;caka may be equated, on the authority of Hemacandra, with the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra, and if we assume that the play was actually <pb n=274 id=pb274 facs="f:274">performed,<note n=1 id=n274.1>Cf. perhaps the nineteenth-century <hi>Citrayajña</hi>, described by Wilson, ii. 412 ff.</note> all we need do is to assume that the director thus intervened from time to time to help on the action of the play. We are, in any case, very far from the primitive drama, as the long compounds of the prose show, reminding us of the worst eccentricities of Bhavabh&umacr;ti.

<p>The work begins with an act of religious devotion, the performance of the ceremony of the waving of a lamp in honour of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, who appears in the vesture of a herdsman, and thus receives in person the worship of his votaries. The play is essentially religious and mystic, despite the fact that the sports of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a and his comrades, and of R&amacr;dh&amacr; and her friends, are duly introduced. In Act III we have from the mouth of V&rdotb;nd&amacr;, that is Lak&sdotb;m&imacr;, a series of verses setting out the mystic doctrine of the identity of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a and R&amacr;dh&amacr;; K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a is the highest being, descended to earth in the guise of a herdsman, and R&amacr;dh&amacr; represents his Çakti. In Act IV we have the usual scene of the theft by K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a of the clothes of the maidens when they bathe in the Yamun&amacr;, but the restoration is made a test of their faith; K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a demands their devotion as the price of their garments, and asserts that faith in him is superior to the Vedas, to asceticism, and to sacrifice as a means of securing knowledge of him. In the last Act we find the spirits of the night of full moon and of autumn lamenting that the maidens are not dancing the R&amacr;sa with K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, who appears, and whom they remind of this duty of his. He summons his magic power (<hi>yogam&amacr;y&amacr;</hi>) and bids her proceed to the station of the herders to summon the maidens to the dance. Then it is narrated how he himself goes there, and with his flute draws out the maidens to join him, while the gods come in multitudes to pay him honour. Many verses from the <hi>Bh&amacr;gavata Pur&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi> are here borrowed. Finally the god accepts the homage of the maidens and leads them in the dance, as is described again in narrative, until the director breaks off the piece with the assertion that it is impossible to represent adequately the greatness of the god. We can see at once, even if we were not told, that the author was under the influence of R&amacr;m&amacr;nuja, and the fact that his father bears the name of Devaj&imacr;<note n=2 id=n274.2>Devaj&imacr;ti as read by the editor and Winternitz is a quaint misreading.</note> suggests a decidedly modern date.

<pb n=275 id=pb275 facs="f:275"><p>A glimpse into a form of entertainment not represented by any Sanskrit drama so far published is given by the changes made in the fourth Act of the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi> at an unknown date. The Apabhra&ndota;ça stanzas introduced into that Act cannot be assigned to the period of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, unless we are to rewrite the history of the language; Apabhra&ndota;ça represents not a vernacular but a definitely literary language in which the vocabulary is based on Pr&amacr;krit, and the inflexions on a vernacular with free use of Pr&amacr;krit forms as well. Guhasena of Valabh&imacr;, of whom we have inscriptions of <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 559&ndash;69, was celebrated as a composer in Apabhra&ndota;ça as well as in Sanskrit and Pr&amacr;krit, and the new literary form may have arisen in the sixth century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> as an effort to produce something nearer the vernacular than Pr&amacr;krit, but yet literary, much as the modern dialects have evolved literatures largely by reliance on Sanskrit. It can hardly be doubted that the Apabhra&ndota;ça stanzas represent the libretto of a pantomime (<hi>n&rdotb;tya</hi>). Such pantomimes are well known as a form of the nautch at R&amacr;jput courts; the dancers perform a well-known scene, and sing verses to a musical accompaniment; the chief element, however, is the gestures and postures. In the case of the pantomime based on the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>, the verses placed in the mouth of the king may have been sung by an actor, while those regarding the forsaken elephant and the Ha&ndota;sas may have been sung by singers, male or female, acting under him. There is an introduction in Pr&amacr;krit for the libretto, which very possibly as inserted in the drama has not come down to us in full, though in any case the libretto in such instances is of only secondary importance and never adequate. It is a plausible suggestion that the introduction of the libretto into the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi> was the outcome of the difficulty felt by the ordinary audience in picking up the sense of the fourth Act of the play, which contains in overwhelming measure Sanskrit stanzas, and, therefore, must have been extremely difficult for the audience to follow. The date of the change is uncertain; on linguistic grounds it has been placed after Hemacandra and before the date of the <hi>Pr&amacr;k&rdotb;ta Pi&nmacr;gala</hi>.<note n=1 id=n275.1>See Jacobi, <hi>Bhavisattakaha</hi>, p. 58 n. Influence by the Y&amacr;tr&amacr;s is probable; Windisch, <hi>Sansk. Phil.</hi> p. 407.</note>







<pb n=276 id=pb276 facs="f:276">
<div1 id=ch12 n=XII>
<head type=label>XII</head>

<head>THE CHARACTERISTICS AND ACHIEVEMENT OF THE SANSKRIT DRAMA</head>


<p>The Sanskrit drama may legitimately be regarded as the highest product of Indian poetry, and as summing up in itself the final conception of literary art achieved by the very self-conscious creators of Indian literature. This art was essentially aristocratic; the drama was never popular in the sense in which the Greek drama possessed that quality. From an early period in Indian history we find the distinction of class reflected in a distinction of language; culture was reserved largely for the two higher castes, the Brahmin and the K&sdotb;atriya or ruling class. It was in this rarified atmosphere that the Sanskrit drama came into being, and it was probably to litterati of high cultivation that its creation from the hints present in religion and in the epic was due. The Brahmin, in fact, much abused as he has been in this as in other matters, was the source of the intellectual distinction of India. As he produced Indian philosophy, so by another effort of his intellect he evolved the subtle and effective form of the drama. Brahmins, it must be remembered, had long been the inheritors of the epic tradition, and this tradition they turned to happy use in the evolution of the drama.

<p>The drama bears, therefore, essential traces of its connexion with the Brahmins. They were idealist in outlook, capable of large generalizations, but regardless of accuracy in detail, and to create a realistic drama was wholly incompatible with their temperament. The accurate delineation of facts or character was to them nothing; they aimed at the creation in the mind of the audience of sentiment, and what was necessary for this end was all that was attempted. All poetry was, in the later analysis, which is implicit in the practice of the earlier poets, essentially a means of suggesting feeling, and this function devolved most of <pb n=277 id=pb277 facs="f:277">all on the drama. Nothing, therefore, is of value save what tends to this end, and it is the function of the true dramatist to lay aside everything which is irrelevant for this purpose.

<p>It follows from this principle that the plot is a secondary element<note n=1 id=n277.1>Contrast Aristotle&apos;s doctrine of plot as the soul of tragedy (<hi>Poetics</hi>, 1450 <hi>a</hi> 38).</note> in the drama in its highest form, the heroic play or N&amacr;&tdotb;aka. To complicate it would divert the mind from emotion to intellectual interest, and affect injuriously the production of sentiment. The dramatist, therefore, will normally choose a well-known theme which in itself is apt to place the spectator in the appropriate frame of mind to be affected by the appropriate emotion. It is then his duty by the skill with which he handles his theme to bring out in the fullest degree the sentiment appropriate to the piece. This is in essentials the task set before themselves by the great dramatists; K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa makes subtle changes in the story of Çakuntal&amacr;, not for the sake of improving the plot as such, but because the alterations are necessary to exhibit in perfection the sentiment of love, which must be evoked in the hearts of the audience. The crudities of the epic tale left Çakuntal&amacr; a business-like young woman and Du&hdotb;&sdotb;anta a selfish and calculating lover; both blemishes had to be removed in order that the spectator might realize within himself, in ideal form, the tenderness of a girl&apos;s first affection, and the honourable devotion of the king, clouded only by a curse against which he had no power.

<p>The emotions which thus it was desired to evoke were, however, strictly limited by the Brahminical theory of life. The actions and status of man in any existence depend on no accident; they are essentially the working out of deeds done in a previous birth, and these again are explained by yet earlier actions from time without beginning. Indian drama is thus deprived of a motif which is invaluable to Greek tragedy, and everywhere provides a deep and profound tragic element, the intervention of forces beyond control or calculation in the affairs of man, confronting his mind with obstacles upon which the greatest intellect and the most determined will are shattered. A conception of this kind would deprive the working of the law of the act of all validity, and, however much in popular ideas the inexorable character of the act might be obscured by notions of <pb n=278 id=pb278 facs="f:278">an age before the evolution of the belief of the inevitable operation of the act, in the deliberate form of expression in drama this principle could not be forgotten. We lose, therefore, the spectacle of the good man striving in vain against an inexorable doom; we lose even the wicked man whose power of intellect and will make us admire him, even though we welcome his defeat. The wicked man who perishes is merely, in the view of the Sanskrit drama, a criminal undergoing punishment, for whose sufferings we should feel no sympathy whatever; such a person is not a suitable hero for any drama, and it is a mere reading of modern sentiment into ancient literature to treat Duryodhana in the <hi>&Umacr;rubha&nmacr;ga</hi> as the hero of the drama.<note n=1 id=n278.1>See above, pp. 38, 96, 106.</note> He justly pays the full penalty for insolence and contempt of Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u.

<p>It follows, therefore, that the sentiments which are to be evoked by a Sanskrit N&amacr;&tdotb;aka are essentially the heroic or the erotic, with that of wonder as a valued subordinate element, appropriate in the <hi>dénouement</hi>. The wonderful well consorts with the ideal characters of legend, which accepts without incredulity or discomfort the intervention of the divine in human affairs, and therefore follows with ready acceptance the solution of the knot in the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> or the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>. Heroism and love, of course, cannot be evoked without the aid of episodes which menace the hero and heroine with the failure to attain their aims; there must be danger and interference with the course of true love, but the final result must see concord achieved. Hence it is impossible to expect that any drama shall be a true tragedy; in the long run the hero and the heroine must be rewarded by perfect happiness and union. The <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi> of Har&sdotb;a illustrates the rule to perfection; the sublimity of self-sacrifice suggests real tragedy, but this would be wholly out of harmony with the spirit of India, and the intervention of Gaur&imacr; is invoked to secure that the self-sacrifice is crowned by a complete and immediate reward in this life. The figure of an Antigone might have been paralleled in Indian life; it would not be acceptable to the spirit of Indian drama.

<p>Idealist as it is, the spirit of the drama declines to permit of a division of sentiment; it will not allow the enemy of the hero to rival him in any degree; nothing is more striking than the <pb n=279 id=pb279 facs="f:279">failure to realize the possibility of a great dramatic creation presented by the character of R&amacr;va&ndotb;a as the rival of R&amacr;ma for S&imacr;t&amacr;&apos;s love. R&amacr;va&ndotb;a varies in the hands of the dramatists, but all tend to reduce him to the status of a boastful and rather stupid villain, who is inferior at every point to his rival. Equally effectively the drama banishes from the possibilities the conception of a struggle of conscience in the mind of the hero or the heroin;<note n=1 id=n279.1>Contrast Aristotle&apos;s doctrine of <GR><amart'ia</GR> (<hi>Poetics</hi>, 1453 <hi>a</hi> 10 ff.), as in Euripides&apos;s <hi>Hippolytos</hi>; G. Norwood, <hi>Greek Tragedy</hi>, pp. 209 f., 213 f.</note> if this were represented, it would create a similar struggle in the mind of the audience, and destroy the unity and purity of the sentiment, which it is the part of the drama to generate.

<p>The style similarly is explained and justified by the end of suggesting sentiment. The lyric stanzas, at first sight strangely undramatic,<note n=2 id=n279.2>Greek tragedy progressively reduced the lyric element in the drama, in harmony with the rhetorical trend of the Greek intellect, and approximated in language to ordinary speech; Aristotle, <hi>Poetics</hi>, 1450 <hi>b</hi> 9; <hi>Rhetoric</hi>, iii. 1 and 2; Haigh, <hi>The Tragic Drama of the Greeks</hi>, ch. vi, § 3.</note> find their full explanation when it is remembered how effective each is in exciting the appropriate emotion in the mind of the audience, which, deeply versed in Sanskrit poetry, is keen to appreciate the effect of each stanza. The simplicity or even negligence of the prose of the drama is thus also explained and excused. It is not necessary to excite sentiment; it serves merely as the mode of communicating facts, and of enabling the audience to follow the action, until an opportunity is afforded to excite feeling by the melody of a verse, all the more effective from its sudden emergence from the flatness of its environment. The same consideration explains the importance of those elements of which we can form so faint an impression, the dance, music, song, and the mimetic art. The elaborate code of gestures laid down in the theory, and unquestionably bulking large in practice, was all intended to produce in cultivated spirits the sentiments appropriate to the play.

<p>The ideal character of the heroic drama extends itself even to the N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;, where a closer approach to real life might be expected. The dramatists, however, make no attempt at realism; they choose their subjects from the legend, and they cast over the trivial <hi>amourettes</hi> of their heroes the glamour derived from the assurance that the winning in marriage of a maiden will <pb n=280 id=pb280 facs="f:280">assure them universal rule. The action of the play is thus not suffered to degenerate into a portrayal of the domestic difficulties of the harem system under polygamic conditions; the dramatists do not seek realism, but are content to reproduce a stereotyped scheme of love, jealousy, parting, and reunion, a sequence well calculated to evoke the sentiment of love in the mind of the audience. Even in the Prakara&ndotb;a, in which realism might be expected, seeing that it condescends to heroes of less than royal or divine status, there is no actual exception: though the author of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> has had the power to infuse a semblance of life and actuality into his characters, Bhavabh&umacr;ti shows us in the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi> nothing but types suggesting the erotic sentiment. Equally ideal is the Vy&amacr;yoga with its suggestion of heroism and its deliberate selection of its subject from the epic tradition.

<p>Tragedy proper is denied us by these conditions of Indian thought, and comedy in any of its higher forms is also difficult; it might legitimately be expected to prevail in the N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr; or the Prakara&ndotb;a, but it is unduly subordinated to the erotic sentiment and, though not absent, is comparatively undeveloped. The Prahasana and the Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a indeed appeal to the comic sentiment, but only in an inferior and degraded form, a fact expressed in the failure of the classical drama to preserve a single specimen of either form of composition.

<p>Limited by the nature of the intellectual movement which produced it, the Sanskrit drama could never achieve the perfection of Greek tragedy or comedy. K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, greatest of Indian dramatists, experiences no uneasiness at the structure of life or the working of the world. He accepts without question or discontent the fabric of Indian society. When Goethe writes of him:

<lg lang=de>
    <l>Willst du die Blüthe des frühen, die Früchte des späteren Jahres,
      <l rend="indent(2)">Willst du, was reizt und entzückt, willst du, was sättigt und nährt,
    <l>Willst du den Himmel, die Erde, mit einem Namen begreifen,
      <l rend="indent(2)">Nenn&apos; ich Çakuntal&amacr; dich, und so ist alles gesagt,
</lg>

<p rend=noindent>the praise is doubtless just in a measure, but it may easily be pressed further than is justifiable. For the deeper questions of <pb n=281 id=pb281 facs="f:281">human life K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa has no message for us; they raised, so far as we can see, no question in his own mind; the whole Brahmanical system, as restored to glory under the Guptas, seems to have satisfied him, and to have left him at peace with the universe. Fascinating and exquisite as is the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, it moves in a narrow world, removed far from the cruelty of real life, and it neither seeks to answer, nor does it solve, the riddles of life. Bhavabh&umacr;ti, it is true, shows some sense of the complexity and difficulty of existence, of the conflict between one duty and another, and the sorrow thus resulting, but with him also there prevailed the rule that all must end in harmony. S&imacr;t&amacr;, who in the older story is actually finally taken away from the husband who allowed himself to treat her as if her purity were sullied by her captivity in R&amacr;va&ndotb;a&apos;s hands, is restored to R&amacr;ma by divine favour, an ending infinitely less dramatic than final severance after vindication. How serious a limitation in dramatic outlook is produced by the Brahmanical theory of life, the whole history of the Sanskrit drama shows.<note n=1 id=n281.1>Contrast Greek tragedy; Butcher, <hi>Greek Genius</hi>, pp. 105 ff.; G. Norwood, <hi>Greek Tragedy</hi>, pp. 97 f., 114 f., 128 f., 177, 318, 324; W. Nestle, <hi>Euripides</hi> (1901).</note> Moreover, acceptance of the Brahmanic tradition permits the production of such a play as the <hi>Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;akauçika</hi>, where reason and humanity are revolted beyond measure by the insane vengeance taken by the sage Viçv&amacr;mitra on the unfortunate king for an act of charity.

<p>The drama suffered also from its close dependence on the epic, and the failure of the poets to recognize that the epic subjects were often as a whole undramatic. Hence frequently, as in the vast majority of the R&amacr;ma dramas and those based on the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;rata</hi>, we have nothing but the recasting of the epic narrative into a semi-dramatic form, without real dramatic structure. There was nothing in the theory to hint at the error of such a course; on the contrary, to the poets the subject was one admirably suitable, since in itself it suggested the appropriate sentiments, and therefore left them merely the duty of heightening the effects. This led on the high road to the outward signs of the degradation of the drama, the abandoning of any interest in anything save the production of lyric or narrative stanzas of perfection of form, judged in accordance with a taste which progressively declined into a rejection of simplicity and <pb n=282 id=pb282 facs="f:282">the search for what was recondite. To the later poets the drama is an exercise in style, and that, as contrasted with the highest products of Indian literature, a fantastic and degraded one.

<p>To the Brahmin ideal individuality has no appeal; the law of life has no room for deviation from type; the caste system is rigid, and for each rank in life there is a definite round of duties, whence departure is undesirable and dangerous. The drama likewise has no desire for individual figures, but only for typical characters. The defect from the Aristotelian as from the modern point of view of the R&amacr;ma dramas is simply that R&amacr;ma is conceived as an ideal, a man without faults, and therefore for us lacking in the essential traits of humanity. Similarly, in the style of the drama we are denied any differentiation of individuals as contrasted with classes. The divergence in the use of Sanskrit or Pr&amacr;krit, and in the different kinds of Pr&amacr;krit, marks the essential distinction of men and women, and of those of high and those of humble rank, but beyond this characterization does not go. We are treated to an artificial court speech, which assorts with stereotyped emotions, refined, elegant, sentimental, rich in the compliments of court gallantly, often pathetic, marked with a distinct strain of philosophical commonplace, and fond of suggested meanings and <hi>double entendres</hi>, hinting at the events yet to come. But the dramatists made no serious attempt to create individual characters, and to assign to them a speech of their own; they vary greatly in merit as regards characterization, but even the best dramas paint types, not individuals.

<p>Indifference to individuality necessarily meant indifference to action, and therefore to plot, and this lies at the basis of the steady progress by which the dialogue was neglected in favour of the stanzas. The latter express the general; they draw highly condensed, but also often extremely poetical, pictures of the beauty of nature in one of its many aspects, or of the charms of the beloved; or they enunciate the Brahmanical solutions of the problems of life and conduct. In them the individual has no place; the beloved may be described, but she is merely typical. These stanzas appealed to the audience; we have no echo in India of the criticisms which were levelled in Greece against Euripides, for the introduction of sentiments unfitted to his characters and the scenes involved, and we have no hint that <pb n=283 id=pb283 facs="f:283">Indian theory ever recognized that the drama by the tenth century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> was in a state of decadence.

<p>The peculiar and limited view of the drama was intimately connected with its Brahmanical character. The drama of Greece was popular; it appealed to all free Athenian citizens,<note n=1 id=n283.1>For its extension and popularity outside Athens, see Haigh, <hi>The Tragic Drama of the Greeks</hi>, chap. vi, § 4.</note> an infinitely wider class than that for which the dramas of India in Sanskrit and Pr&amacr;krit were composed, and it was written in a language easily comprehended by all those who viewed the spectacle. From the period of the earliest dramas known to us the full comprehension of the words can have been confined to a limited section of the audience, which, however, had sufficient pleasure in the spectacle, in the song, the pantomimic dances, and the music, and sufficient general comprehension of the drama to follow it adequately enough. Such an audience, however, acted as a stimulus to refinement and elaboration; the dramatist could neglect the prime necessity of being understood which weighed on the Greek dramatist, and indulge in the production of something recondite, calculated to manifest his skill in metrical form and management of words. The fact that Sanskrit was not a normal living language presented him with the temptation, to which none of the later dramatists rises superior, of the free use of the vast store of alleged synonyms presented by the lexica,<note n=2 id=n283.2>Gawro&nacute;ski, <hi lang=fr>Les sources de quelques drames indiens</hi>, pp. 1 ff.</note> freed from any inconvenient necessity, such as exists in every living language, of using words only in that precise nuance which every synonym possesses in a living dialect.

<p>The same tendency to artificiality was undoubtedly stimulated by the fact that plays for their reputation must have depended largely on being read, not witnessed, however important it may have been for the poet to secure the honour of public performance. The popularity and number of the K&amacr;vyas which have come down to us attests the existence of an effective public which, if it did not read the works, at least enjoyed having them read aloud, and the dramatist was thus encouraged, while adhering to the dramatic form, to vie in this genre of literature with the effects produced in the K&amacr;vya. The K&amacr;vya, however, <pb n=284 id=pb284 facs="f:284">was undergoing throughout its history a tendency to seek mere stylistic effects, and this influence must largely have contributed to the elaboration of style of the drama. It is significant that the K&amacr;vyas and dramas of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa show a relative simplicity which contrasts effectively with the complexities of Bhavabh&umacr;ti in drama, and Bh&amacr;ravi and M&amacr;gha in the K&amacr;vya.

<p>To understand the Indian drama we have aid from a work of curious character and importance, the <hi>K&amacr;maç&amacr;stra</hi> or <hi>K&amacr;mas&umacr;tra</hi> of V&amacr;tsy&amacr;yana,<note n=1 id=n284.1>See also Schmidt&apos;s <hi lang=de>Beiträge zur indischen Erotik</hi>.</note> which was doubtless familiar to the dramatists from K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa onwards. The world which produced the classical drama was one in which the pessimism of Buddhism, with its condemnation of the value of pleasure, had given way to the worship of the great sectarian divinities Çiva and Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u, in whose service the enjoyment of pleasure was legitimate and proper. The Buddhists themselves admittedly felt the force of the demand for a life of ease; we have preserved verses satirizing their love of women, wine, soft living, and luxury, and there is abundant evidence of the decline of austerity in the order. The eclecticism of Har&sdotb;a is sufficiently significant; the policy which at the great festival at Pray&amacr;ga reported by <corr sic="Hiuan Tsang">Hiuan-Tsang</corr> resulted in the dedication of a statue to the Buddha on the first day, to the sun, the favourite deity of his father, on the second, and to Çiva on the third, excludes any possibility of belief in the depth of Har&sdotb;a&apos;s Buddhist beliefs. If there were any doubt as to the strange transformation of feeling among Buddhists, it would be removed by the benediction which opens the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi>, where the Buddha is invoked as rallied on his hardheartedness by the ladies of M&amacr;ra&apos;s train. The process of accommodation had evidently gone very far. The philosophy of the age shows equally the lack of serious interest in the old tenets of Buddhism; we have the great development of logical studies in lieu of insistence on the truths of misery and the path to its removal, while the <hi>chef-d&apos;&oelig;uvre</hi> of the period outside Buddhist circles is the complicated and fantastic system of the S&amacr;&mdota;khya philosophy, which adequately reflects the artistic spirit of the time in its comparison of nature with a dancer who makes her début, and gracefully retires from the stage when she has satisfied her audience. The spirit of Açoka has entirely disappeared <pb n=285 id=pb285 facs="f:285">from the royal families of India, and the courts demanded amusement with refinement, just as they sought for elegance in art. The interests of this world are centred in the pleasures of life, the festivals which amused the court and the people by the pomp of their celebration from time to time, and in the intervals the amusements of the palace and the harem, sports in the water, the game of the swing, the plucking of flowers, song, dance, pantomime, and such other diversions as were necessary to while away the endless leisure of princes, who left the business of their realms to ministers and soldiers, while they spared themselves any fatigue more serious than that of love encounters. The manners of their princes were aped by their rich subjects, and there was no dearth of courtiers and parasites to aid them in their diversions. The man about town (<hi>n&amacr;garaka</hi>) as sketched by the <hi>K&amacr;mas&umacr;tra</hi><note n=1 id=n285.1>pp. 57 ff.; Keith, <hi>Sansk. Lit.</hi> pp. 29 ff.</note> is rich and cultivated; devoted to the niceties of attire and personal adornment, perfumed, pomaded, and garlanded; he is a musician, and a lover of books; cage-birds afford him pleasure of the eyes, and diversion in teaching them speech; a lovely garden with an arbour presents facilities for amusement and repose. In the daytime the care of the toilet, cock fights, ram fights, excursions in the neighbouring country, fill his time; while at night, after a concert or ballet, there are the joys of love, in which the <hi>K&amacr;mas&umacr;tra</hi> gives him more elaborate instruction than the <hi lang=la>Ars Amoris</hi> ever contemplated. The luxury of polygamy did not suffice such a man; he is allowed to enjoy the society of courtesans, and in them, as in Athens, he finds the intellectual interests which are denied to his legitimate wives. With them and the more refined and cultured of the band of hangers-on, high and low, with whom he is surrounded, he can indulge in the pleasures of the discussion of literature, and appreciate the fine efforts of the poets and dramatists. From such a nature, of course, anything heroic cannot be expected, and the poets recognize this state of affairs; but it demands refinement, beauty, luxury, and the demand is fully met. Love is naturally a capital theme, but the dramatists suffer from one grave difficulty from the condition of the society which they depict. The ideal of a romantic love between two persons free and independent, masters of their own destinies, is in great measure denied <pb n=286 id=pb286 facs="f:286">to them, and they are reduced to the banality of the intrigue between the king and the damsel who is destined to be his wife, but who by some accident has been introduced into his harem in a humble position.

<p>For the dramatists the favour of a king was the chief object to be aimed at, and kings were evidently very willing to lend their names to dramatic and other compositions, whatever part they actually took in their production. The persistence of the rumour which regards Har&sdotb;a as winning his fame in part at the expense of B&amacr;&ndotb;a, may be unjust to the king, but at any rate it expresses what was popular belief in the possibility of such a happening in poetical circles, and it is indeed incredible that a king should have been so scrupulous as to refuse any aid in his literary toils from his court poets. Competitions in exhibitions of poetry were in favour with monarchs, but they were not the only patrons; their actions excited imitation,<note n=1 id=n286.1>Ma&nmacr;kha, <hi>Çr&imacr;ka&ndotb;&tdotb;hacarita</hi>, xxv; <hi>Bhojaprabandha</hi>; <hi><corr sic="Vikram&amacr;-kadevacarita">Vikram&amacr;&nmacr;kadevacarita</corr></hi>; <hi>K&amacr;vyam&imacr;m&amacr;&ndota;s&amacr;</hi>, pp. 49 ff.</note> and even in Buddhist and Jain circles the desire to adopt the expedient of drama in connexion with religion was evinced. But even when applied by Brahmins, Buddhists, or Jains to philosophy or religion, the drama bore throughout the unmistakable stamp of its original predominance in circles whose chief interest was gallantry: the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi> bears eloquent evidence of this for Buddhist ideas<corr>,</corr> the <hi>Prabodhacandrodaya</hi> for Brahmin philosophy, and the <hi>Mohar&amacr;japar&amacr;jaya</hi> for Jainism.

<p>A society of this kind was certain to encourage refinement and elegance in poetry; it was equally certain to lead to artificiality and unreality. But we may be certain that true poetic taste existed; it is attested not merely by the existence and fame of such dramas as those of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, but in the kindred sphere of music it has an interesting exposition in the third Act of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, in which, following with slight changes the precedent of Bh&amacr;sa, C&amacr;rudatta is made to express to the unresponsive ears of Maitreya, his one faithful friend, the effect produced on his ears by the sweet singing of Rebhila, which has come to console him in the midst of his sorrow:<note n=2 id=n286.2>The translation by Ryder.</note>

<lg>
    <l>The notes of love, peace, sweetness, could I trace,
      <l rend="indent(2)">The note that thrills, the note of passion too,
    <pb n=287 id=pb287 facs="f:287"><l>The note of woman&apos;s loveliness and grace,
      <l rend="indent(2)">Ah, my poor words add nothing, nothing new.
    <l>But as the notes in sweetest cadence rang,
    <l>I thought it was my hidden love who sang.
    <l>The melody of song, the stricken strings,
    <l>In undertone that half unconscious clings,
    <l>More clearly sounding as the passions rise,
    <l>But ever sweeter as the music dies.
    <l>Words that strong passion fain would say again,
    <l>Yet checks their second utterance&mdash;in vain;
    <l>For music sweet as this lives on until
    <l>I walk as hearing sweetest music still.
</lg>

<p>To R&amacr;jaçekhara<note n=1 id=n287.1><hi>K&amacr;vyam&imacr;m&amacr;&ndota;s&amacr;</hi>, pp. 49 ff.</note> we owe a full account of the studies which went to make up the finished poet, who had the choice of Sanskrit, Pr&amacr;krit, Apabhra&ndota;ça, and Paiç&amacr;c&imacr;, or the speech of the goblins (<hi>bh&umacr;tabh&amacr;&sdotb;&amacr;</hi>), as his modes of composition. Knowledge of grammar, of the dictionary, poetics, and metrics are demanded, as well as skill in the sixty-four acts; purity of mind, speech, and body are requisite, as well as most attractive surroundings. The poet&apos;s male attendants are to speak Apabhra&ndota;ça, the female M&amacr;gadh&imacr;, while those within the harem itself are to use Pr&amacr;krit and Sanskrit, and his friends to exercise themselves in all forms of speech. With pardonable lack of historical truth, we are told anecdotes of kings who forbade the use in their harems of certain letters, and combinations of sounds, on grounds of euphony, and the poet may imitate their usage. We also learn that Sanskrit was affected among the people of Bengal, in L&amacr;&tdotb;a Pr&amacr;krit, in M&amacr;rw&amacr;r, and by the &Tdotb;akkas and Bh&amacr;d&amacr;nakas, Apabhra&ndota;ça, while in Avant&imacr;, Pariy&amacr;tra, and Daçapura Bh&umacr;tabh&amacr;&sdotb;&amacr; prevailed. The people of Sur&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;ra and the Trava&ndotb;as are credited elsewhere<note n=2 id=n287.2><hi>Ibid.</hi>, p. 33.</note> with intermingling Sanskrit and Apabhra&ndota;ça, while unkind comments are made on the mode of pronouncing Sanskrit among the excellent poets of Kashmir, and on the nasal accent of the north as opposed to the music of that in Pañc&amacr;la. We learn also<note n=3 id=n287.3><hi>Ibid.</hi>, p. 78.</note> that poets were wont to make journeys, and to utilize the knowledge of other places thus gained in their works.

<p>R&amacr;jaçekhara<note n=4 id=n287.4><hi>Ibid.</hi>, p. 53.</note> is also emphatic regarding the capacity of women: <pb n=288 id=pb288 facs="f:288">daughters of kings or ministers, courtesans, and wives of jesters, were skilled as poets, the capacity which brings about the ability to compose being a matter affecting the soul, and not, therefore, bound up with sex. To R&amacr;jaçekhara the ability to write poems is largely due to experiences in previous births, and he logically denies that sex can affect this. But though verses are cited from the poetesses in the anthologies, and not a few names are known, and Avantisundar&imacr;, R&amacr;jaçekhara&apos;s own wife, appears to have been an authority on poetics, it is certain that no drama of importance has come down to us which is written by a woman. The explanation for this would seem rather to lie in social conventions, as in Greece, for there is no reason to suppose that the clever women mentioned by R&amacr;jaçekhara, and doubtless not rare in the courts, could not have composed plays of merit.








<pb n=289 id=pb289 facs="f:289">
<div0 id=pt3 n=III>
<head type=label>III</head>

<head>DRAMATIC THEORY</head>


<pb n=290 id=pb290 facs="f:290">
<div1 id=ch13 n=XIII>
<head type=label>XIII</head>

<head>THE THEORY OF THE DRAMATIC ART</head>


<div2 id=ch13.1 n=1>
<head><ab type=divNum>1.</ab> <hi>The Treatises on Dramatic Art</hi></head>

<p>P&amacr;&ndotb;ini, whose date falls doubtless before 300 <hi rend=asc>B.C.</hi>, alludes in his grammar to the <hi>Na&tdotb;as&umacr;tras</hi>, books of rules for Na&tdotb;as, compiled by Çil&amacr;lin and K&rdotb;ç&amacr;çva, and Professor Hillebrandt<note n=1 id=n290.1>AID., pp. 3 ff.; above, p. 31.</note> has suggested that we should recognize in these works the earliest text-books of the Indian drama. But we have no other suggestion that P&amacr;&ndotb;ini knew of dramatic performances, and the only legitimate conclusion is that these rules were laid down for the guidance of dancers or, perhaps, pantomimes, and with this accords admirably the fact that the dramatic tradition knows nothing of these names, and instead makes the sage Bharata the eponymous hero of the drama. True it was Brahm&amacr;, highest of gods, himself who, at the instance of the gods, produced as a counterpart to the four Vedas, which contain the science of religion and magic, the more mundane N&amacr;&tdotb;ya-Veda, consecrated to the drama, but this Veda is not current among men. Bharata, on the other hand, whose task it was to direct the production by the Apsarases in heaven of plays for the delight of the gods and who thus had practical experience of the art, has set forth for men the principles of the drama in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> which, if not inspired, has at least a measure of sanctity, and thus supplies an authoritative basis for practice.

<p>The legend is interesting because it precisely interprets the spirit of India towards authority; Bharata occupies in the theory of the drama a place analogous to that of P&amacr;&ndotb;ini in grammar, but unfortunately the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> has fared badly in comparison with the <hi>A&sdotb;&tdotb;&amacr;dhy&amacr;y&imacr;</hi>, which has, through the care of its commentators, come down to us in a form but little changed from that it assumed in the hands of its author. The <pb n=291 id=pb291 facs="f:291">work, which we have under the title <hi>Bh&amacr;rat&imacr;ya N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>,<note n=1 id=n291.1>Ed. KM. 1894, i&ndash;xiv; by J. Grosset, Paris, 1898; xviii&ndash;xx, xxxiv in F. Hall&apos;s <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi>; xv&ndash;xvii (xiv&ndash;xvi), in Regnaud, <hi lang=fr>Annales du Musée Guimet</hi>, i and ii; xxviii in Grosset&apos;s <hi lang=fr>Contribution à l&apos;étude de la musique hindoue</hi>, Paris, 1888; vi and vii in Regnaud, <hi lang=fr>Rhétorique sanskrite</hi>.</note> is extremely badly preserved in the manuscript tradition, a fact due in part to the comparatively late date of any commentary upon it. We have only a few references to an exposition of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> by M&amacr;t&rdotb;gupta, a somewhat mysterious figure with a more or less legendary connexion with K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, with whom he has even been identified;<note n=2 id=n291.2>Bhau Daji, JBRAS. vi. 218 ff. Lévi (TI. ii. 4) suggests that the <hi>Ç&amacr;stra</hi> is largely made out of a versified comment on original S&umacr;tras. For various guesses as to M&amacr;t&rdotb;gupta, cf. JRAS. 1903, p. 570; see Peterson, <hi>Subh&amacr;&sdotb;it&amacr;vali</hi>, p. 89. It is probable that the <hi>Ç&amacr;stra</hi> is related to an original S&umacr;tra in the same way as the <hi>K&amacr;mandak&imacr;ya N&imacr;tiç&amacr;stra</hi> to the <hi>Arthaç&amacr;stra</hi>. Cf. S. K. De, SP. i. 27 ff.</note> if we are to place any faith in his contemporaneity with K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, he may date from the close of the fourth century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> It is significant that tradition makes him for a time king of Kashmir, for it is to that country we owe the commentaries of Ça&nmacr;kuka, who wrote the epic <hi>Bhuvan&amacr;bhyudaya</hi> under Ajit&amacr;p&imacr;&ddotb;a (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 813&ndash;50), and of Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;yaka, who belongs to the period of Ça&nmacr;karavarman (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 883&ndash;902). In the same line of tradition is the great work of Abhinavagupta, the <hi>Abhinavabh&amacr;rat&imacr;</hi>, which has been lucky enough to come to light after long oblivion, and which represents the erudition of the close of the tenth century.

<p>The treatise, as we have it, is elaborate, covering the whole ground connected with the drama. It deals with the architecture of the theatre, the scenery, and the dress and equipment of the actors; the religious ceremonial to be observed at every representation; the music, the dance, the movements and gestures of the actors, and their mode of delivery; the division of rôles; the general characteristics of poetry; the different classes of drama, and the emotions and sentiments which form a vital element in the drama. There is confusion, complexity, and repetition in the work, but that much of it is old cannot be doubted. It appears clearly to be based on the examination of a dramatic literature which has been lost, eclipsed by the more perfect dramas of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa and his successors. In the description of classes of drama we seem to have hasty generalizations on insufficient material; the Samavak&amacr;ra, for instance, is described in terms <pb n=292 id=pb292 facs="f:292">which, with the precise definition of the time to be occupied by the acts, can be interpreted only as based on a single drama, and the &Ddotb;ima seems to have a similar origin. The elaborate description of the preliminary scene or P&umacr;rvara&nmacr;ga, which is practically non-existent in the classical drama, suggests a period of a less cultivated taste. A more definite result may be derived from comparison of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> with the works of Açvagho&sdotb;a and of Bh&amacr;sa. The Pr&amacr;krits recognized by the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> are clearly later than those of Açvagho&sdotb;a and more akin to those found in Bh&amacr;sa; again the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> recognizes the use of Ardha-M&amacr;gadh&imacr;, found in these two dramatists, but not later, while, like them, he ignores the M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr; of the later dramas. Moreover Bh&amacr;sa expressly alludes to a <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi><note n=1 id=n292.1><hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi>, ii. A treatise on drama is also attributed to him; <hi>Arthadyotanik&amacr;</hi>, 2.</note> and it is most probable that both he and K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa had knowledge of the prototype of the present text. That Bh&amacr;sa by no means slavishly adheres to the rules of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, either as regards the formal mode of terminating his dramas or the exclusion of scenes of death from the stage,<note n=2 id=n292.2>That in the <hi>Ç&amacr;stra</hi> itself there is contradiction in this regard between x. 83 f. and xviii. 19 f. is shown by Lindenau, BS., p. 34.</note> merely shows that when he wrote the Ç&amacr;stra had not attained any binding force. There is nothing to contradict the date thus vaguely indicated,<note n=3 id=n292.3>Cf. Jacobi, <hi>Bhavisattakaha</hi>, pp. 83 ff., who suggests the third century; the Pr&amacr;krit seems anterior to M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr; in development; Jacobi suggests Ujjayin&imacr; as a possible location in view of the affinity to M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr; and Çaurasen&imacr;. Cf. GIL. iii. 8.</note> for the treatment of poetics in general is simple and early, and it is impossible to draw any conclusion as to date from the remarks on music, apart altogether from the constant possibility that incidental additions and alterations have been made in the work.

<p>It was inevitable that the complicated and confused work of Bharata should be superseded for many purposes by something more accessible and easy to follow, and this need was supplied by the <hi><corr sic="D&amacr;çar&umacr;pa">Daçar&umacr;pa</corr></hi> of Dhana&mdota;jaya, son of Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u, and <hi>protégé</hi> of the ill-fated king Muñja of Dh&amacr;r&amacr; (974&ndash;95). The work takes its name from the ten primary forms of drama recognized in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, which is followed closely by Dhana&mdota;jaya, his deviations being unimportant and trivial, such as a new division of types of heroine or of the erotic sentiment. On the other hand, Dhana&mdota;jaya omits by far the greater part of the topics of <pb n=293 id=pb293 facs="f:293">his model; his four books of wooden verses treat first of the subject-matter and plot; then of the hero, the heroine, and other characters, and the language of the drama; thirdly of the prologue and the different kinds of drama; and lastly of the emotions and sentiments, thus concentrating attention on the essential dramatic features. The text is naturally often unintelligible save in the light of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> itself and of the commentary, <hi>Avaloka</hi>, which is ascribed to Dhanika, son of Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u, and minister of Utpaladeva, a term which is an alias of Muñja. The identity of the two writers is suggested by the fact that later writers ascribe passages of the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi> itself to Dhanika, and that without the commentary the work is in a sense incomplete. But, on the other hand, in a few passages the commentator more or less distinctly differs from the text, and it seems sufficient to assume that they may have been brothers. The <hi>Avaloka</hi> must have been completed after Muñja&apos;s death, since it cites Padmagupta&apos;s <hi>Navas&amacr;has&amacr;&nmacr;kacarita</hi>, which was written under Sindhur&amacr;ja, and this throws some doubt on the identification of Dhanika with the Dhanika Pa&ndotb;&ddotb;ita to whose son, Vasant&amacr;c&amacr;rya, a land grant was made by Muñja in <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 974. Dhanika quotes stanzas of his own in Sanskrit and Pr&amacr;krit and also a treatise, <hi>K&amacr;vyanir&ndotb;aya</hi>, elsewhere unknown.<note n=1 id=n293.1>Ed. F. Hall, Calcutta, 1865; trs. G. C. O. Haas, New York, 1912. Jacobi (GGA. 1913, p. 301) presses for the identity of the writers, but the difference of the name is fatal.</note>

<p>Of the fourteenth century in all probability are three works of unequal importance and merit. The <hi>Prat&amacr;parudr&imacr;ya</hi><note n=2 id=n293.2>Ed. K. P. Trived&imacr;, Bombay, 1909.</note> of Vidy&amacr;n&amacr;tha is a mediocre compilation from the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi> and the <hi>K&amacr;vyaprak&amacr;ça</hi> of Mamma&tdotb;a, covering the whole field of poetics; it illustrates the formal rules of the drama by the composition of a wretched drama in honour of Prat&amacr;parudra of Warangal, whose inscriptions show dates from <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1298 to 1314. Of much greater interest is Vidy&amacr;dhara&apos;s <hi>Ek&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>;<note n=3 id=n293.3>Ed. K. P. Trived&imacr;, Bombay, 1903<corr>;</corr> cf. R. G. Bhandarkar, <hi>Report</hi> (1897) pp. lxviii f.</note> like Vidy&amacr;n&amacr;tha, the author celebrates in his illustrations of his text his patron, in this case Narasi&ndota;ha II of Orissa, perhaps <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1280&ndash;1314; as a poet his merits are negligible, but he shows a lively interest in his subject and intelligence in his views. Of greater popularity than either <pb n=294 id=pb294 facs="f:294">is Viçvan&amacr;tha Kavir&amacr;ja, the author of the <hi>S&amacr;hityadarpa&ndotb;a</hi>,<note n=1 id=n294.1>Ed. BI. with trs., 1851&ndash;75; in part by P. V. Kane, Bombay, 1910.</note> a general treatise on poetics. His handling of the drama is based largely on the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi> and its commentary, but he introduces a good deal of matter from the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> in his sixth chapter, including details of the characteristics and ornaments of the drama, which the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi> omits. In this Viçvan&amacr;tha indicates his servile character, which, however, renders his work the more valuable as an exposition of the orthodox doctrine. Of his ancestry and his own works he makes free mention, but the most definite evidence of his date is the existence in the library at Jammu of a manuscript of his work whose date appears to be <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1383. The lack of order and the errors in his work are made the basis of criticism by R&umacr;pa Gosv&amacr;min in the early part of the sixteenth century, but his own <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;akacandrik&amacr;</hi> shows little improvement on the work of his predecessor, whence it draws much of its material; its real purpose is to eulogize the saint Caitanya, whose disciple R&umacr;pa was and in whose honour he composed dramas of no merit. Equally dependent on Viçvan&amacr;tha and the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi> is Sundaramiçra, whose <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaprad&imacr;pa</hi> was composed in <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1613. Many other treatises on drama are known by name or exist in manuscript, but none apparently of any great importance or repute. Of the fourteenth century also is the <hi>Ras&amacr;r&ndotb;avasudh&amacr;kara</hi><note n=2 id=n294.2>Ed. TSS. no. L, 1916. It freely uses the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi>. Cf. Seshagiri, <hi>Report for 1896&ndash;97</hi>, pp. 7 ff. Many verses by the author are cited.</note> of Çi&nmacr;ga <corr sic="Bh&umacr;pala">Bh&umacr;p&amacr;la</corr>, lord of R&amacr;j&amacr;cala and the land between the Vindhya and Çr&imacr;çaila about <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1330, who cites Vidy&amacr;dhara.

<p>The development of a theory of drama progressed in the closest relation to the general theory of poetics, for the Indian theory of poetry does not admit any distinction in essence between the aesthetic pleasure produced by the drama and any other form of poetry. Thus we find in Abhinavagupta in full application to the drama the theory of suggestion, Dhvani, as the essence of poetry, which appeared in strength about <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 800 and was rendered popular by &Amacr;nandavardhana (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 850) and by Abhinavagupta himself in his comment on the <hi>Dhvany&amacr;loka</hi> of the former. Attacked by Mahiman Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a, author of the <hi>Vyaktiviveka</hi> (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1050), the doctrine was again developed with special <pb n=295 id=pb295 facs="f:295">care by the Kashmirian Mamma&tdotb;a<note n=1 id=n295.1>For the authorship of the <hi>K&amacr;vyaprak&amacr;ça</hi> see Hari Chand, <hi>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa</hi>, pp. 103 ff.</note> at the close of the eleventh century. In slightly varied forms it appears in Vidy&amacr;n&amacr;tha, Vidy&amacr;dhara, and Viçvan&amacr;tha.

<p>Apart from this important development, which, however, has no special application to the drama, there is little progress in the course of the literature. The later authorities are bound by the authority of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>; they repeat unintelligently its descriptions of literary forms such as the <corr sic=Dima>&Ddotb;ima</corr>, the Samavak&amacr;ra, the &Imacr;h&amacr;m&rdotb;ga, the V&imacr;th&imacr;, and the A&nmacr;ka, which had ceased to be in popular use, if indeed the definitions of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> were not merely hasty generalizations from a single play or so in every one of these cases. The most that they do is to omit or to vary details, but not in independence; normally the changes can be traced to variants in the text of the Ç&amacr;stra or to maxims current under Bharata&apos;s name, though not included in the Ç&amacr;stra as we have it. Often the authors differ in the definition of terms in the Ç&amacr;stra which, as often in Sanskrit technical phrases, present ambiguity and admit of various renderings. These divergences are especially frequent in the long lists of characteristics and ornaments or the different means of effecting dramatic results; the Indian love of meaningless subdivision here can indulge itself to its fullest and least profitable extent. A rich variety of such ambiguities is apparent in the verses in which the <hi>Agni Pur&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi><note n=2 id=n295.2>cc. 337&ndash;41. On Dhvani see Keith, <hi>Sansk. Lit.</hi> ch. x.</note> describes the drama, including dancing and the mimetic art, true to its aim to constitute itself a treasure-house of all learning, popular as well as divine. The chief value of the work is the occasional light which it throws on the variants in the text of the Ç&amacr;stra, and its comparative antiquity, for it is cited in the <hi>S&amacr;hityadarpa&ndotb;a</hi> and is probably some centuries older.


<div2 id=ch13.2 n=2>
<head><ab type=divNum>2.</ab> <hi>The Nature and the Types of the Drama</hi></head>

<p>A drama is the imitation or representation of the conditions or situations (<hi>avasth&amacr;nuk&rdotb;ti</hi>)<note n=3 id=n295.3>Bharata cited in Rucipati&apos;s comm. on <hi>Anarghar&amacr;ghava</hi>, 9. Cf. DR. i. 7; SD. 274.</note> in which the personages who form the subject of treatment are placed from time to time, by means of gesture, speech, costume, and expression, and, one version of <pb n=296 id=pb296 facs="f:296">the definition adds, the situations must be such as to produce pleasure or pain, that is, they must be tinged with emotion. It is the presence of these ancillaries which distinguishes the drama from an ordinary poem; a poem appeals to the ear only, a drama is also a spectacle to delight the eyes; hence the term R&umacr;pa or R&umacr;paka as applied generically to the drama, for R&umacr;pa primarily denotes the object of vision, though the Indian tradition gives the artificial explanation that R&umacr;paka denotes a drama because the actors are credited with different parts.

<p>Further light is shown on the nature of drama (<hi>n&amacr;&tdotb;ya</hi>) by the discrimination of it from dance (<hi>n&rdotb;tta</hi>) and mimetic art (<hi>n&rdotb;tya</hi>), which united with song and speech serve to make up the drama.<note n=1 id=n296.1>Cf. Hall, DR. pp. 6 f.</note> The dance is based on time and rhythm; the mimetic art is concerned with representing the feelings or emotions (<hi>bh&amacr;va</hi>), while the essence of the drama is the sentiment (<hi>rasa</hi>) which it evokes in the spectator, a fact which places it on a higher level than either of its handmaidens. But there may be dramas in which these auxiliaries take first place, and on this fact is based a distinction between the primary forms, R&umacr;pakas, in which the poetry is the dominant element and the secondary forms, Upar&umacr;pakas. Of R&umacr;pakas ten are distinguished, N&amacr;&tdotb;aka, Prakara&ndotb;a, Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a, Prahasana, &Ddotb;ima, Vy&amacr;yoga, Samavak&amacr;ra, V&imacr;th&imacr;, A&nmacr;ka, and &Imacr;h&amacr;m&rdotb;ga, which vary in regard to subject-matter (<hi>vastu</hi>), hero or heroine, and sentiment.


<div2 id=ch13.3 n=3>
<head><ab type=divNum>3.</ab> <hi>The Subject-Matter and the Plot</hi></head>

<p>The scene of the plot must be laid in India, and the period must be one of the three ages succeeding the Golden Age, for pleasure and pain, essential elements as we have seen in the drama, cannot be experienced elsewhere than in Bh&amacr;ratavar&sdotb;a, and even there they do not exist in the age of happiness unalloyed.<note n=2 id=n296.2>N. xviii. 89; xix. 1; AP. cccxxxvii. 18, 27.</note> Otherwise the choice is free; the poet may take an incident familiar from tradition (<hi>prakhy&amacr;ta</hi>), or may invent his plot (<hi>utp&amacr;dya</hi>) or may combine both forms (<hi>miçra</hi>). But, if he follows a current legend, it is necessary that he shall not ruin the effect of it by incongruous invention; he must confine his ingenuity to episodes, for otherwise the audience will be painfully disturbed <pb n=297 id=pb297 facs="f:297">by departure from tradition. On the other hand, it is not merely legitimate but also necessary that the dramatist should ennoble his hero, if tradition assigns to him deeds incompatible with the character which he normally exhibits.<note n=1 id=n297.1>DR. i. 15; iii. 20&ndash;22.</note> The epic is not encumbered with such considerations; it can represent Du&hdotb;&sdotb;anta as merely forgetful of his vows to Çakuntal&amacr;, but K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa must clear the character of the king from this seeming baseness by attributing his loss of memory to a curse provoked by a negligence of the heroine herself. The <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> admits, and seeks to explain, if not convincingly, the death of V&amacr;lin, king of the monkeys, at the hands of the virtuous R&amacr;ma; M&amacr;yur&amacr;ja in the <hi>Ud&amacr;ttar&amacr;ghava</hi> passes over the episode in silence, while Bhavabh&umacr;ti, with greater boldness, in the <hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi> perverts tradition to represent V&amacr;lin as an ally of R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, and as slain by R&amacr;ma in legitimate self-defence, and exonerates Kaikey&imacr;.

<p>The subject-matter takes two forms, the principal (<hi>&amacr;dhik&amacr;rika</hi>) and the incidental (<hi>pr&amacr;sa&nmacr;gika</hi>) actions. The first owes its name to the fact that it is connected with the attainment (<hi>adhik&amacr;ra</hi>) of the purpose of the hero, whether that be love, or some material interest, or duty, or two or all of these. In the incidental action the end achieved is not that aimed at by the hero, but it serves as a means towards the fruition of his aims.<note n=2 id=n297.2>N. xix. 2&ndash;6, 25 f.; DR. i. 11, 12, 16; SD. 296 f., 323.</note> The incidental action may take the dimension of an episode (<hi>pat&amacr;k&amacr;</hi>), as is the case with the exploits of Sugr&imacr;va as an ally of R&amacr;ma, or it may be a mere incident (<hi>prakar&imacr;</hi>), as in Act VI of the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> the scene in which the two attendants converse.<note n=3 id=n297.3>N. xix. 23; DR. i. 13; SD. 320&ndash;3; R. iii. 13 f.</note>

<p>An action, when developed in full, as normally it is in the N&amacr;&tdotb;aka, the most perfect of forms of drama, involves of necessity five stages of development (<hi>avasth&amacr;</hi>);<note n=4 id=n297.4>N. xix. 7&ndash;13; DR. i. 18&ndash;20; SD. 324&ndash;9; R. iii. 22&ndash;5.</note> there must be as the beginning (<hi>&amacr;rambha</hi>) the desire to attain some end, which leads on to the determined effort (<hi>prayatna</hi>) to secure the object of desire; this leads to the stage in which success is felt to be possible (<hi>pr&amacr;pty&amacr;ç&amacr;</hi>, <hi>pr&amacr;ptisambhava</hi>) having regard to the means available and the obstacles in the way of achievement; then arrives the certainty of success (<hi>niyat&amacr;pti</hi>), if only some specific <pb n=298 id=pb298 facs="f:298">difficulty can be surmounted; and finally the object is attained (<hi>phal&amacr;gama</hi>). Thus in the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> we have the king&apos;s first anticipation of seeing the heroine, then his eagerness to find a device to meet her again; in Act IV we learn that the anger of the sage, Durv&amacr;sas, has in some measure been appeased, and the possibility of the reunion of the king and Çakuntal&amacr; now exists; in Act VI the discovery of the ring brings back to the king remembrance, and the way for a reunion is paved, to be attained in the following act. The <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, no less perfect an example of the minor type, the N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;, reveals to us the aims of the minister to secure the union of the heroine and the king; a definite step to this end is taken when the heroine decides to depict the face of Vatsa on the canvas; in Act II the lovers are united for the moment, but subject to the risk of discovery by the queen; then the king recognizes that his success in love depends on winning the queen&apos;s favour, which is successfully accomplished in the last act.

<p>There are also five elements of the plot (<hi>arthaprak&rdotb;ti</hi>),<note n=1 id=n298.1>N. xix. 19&ndash;21; DR. i. 16 f.; SD. 317&ndash;19. The parallelism is faulty: neither episode nor incident is necessary nor corresponds to Pr&amacr;pty&amacr;ç&amacr; and Niyat&amacr;pti nor Garbha and Vimarça; Dhanika, DR. i. 33, admits this in effect; there is no episode in <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, III. Cf. R. iii. 22.</note> which the theory not very accurately parallels with the five stages of the action. The first is the germ (<hi>b&imacr;ja</hi>) whence springs the action, as in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi> from Yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a&apos;s scheme to secure the princess for the king. The second, with change of metaphor, is the drop (<hi>bindu</hi>) which spreads out as oil on water; the course of the drama, which has seemed to be interrupted, is again set in activity; thus in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, when the festival of the god of love is over, the princess gives a decisive impulse to the motion of the drama by recognizing in him, whom she deemed the god himself, the king for whom she was destined as a bride. The other three elements are the episode, the incident, and the <hi>dénouement</hi> (<hi>k&amacr;rya</hi>).

<p>Based on these parallel sets is a third division of the junctures<note n=2 id=n298.2>N. xix. 16, 35 ff.; DR. i. 22 ff.; SD. 330 ff. Hali (DR., p. 11 n.) suggests <hi>nibarha&ndotb;a</hi> as correct (N. xix. 36), wrongly. Cf. R. iii. 26&ndash;74. The precise parallelism of the Sandhis and Avasth&amacr;s in the <hi>B&amacr;lar&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> is given in R. iii. 23&ndash;5.</note> (<hi>sandhi</hi>), which carry each of the stages of the action to its natural close. They are the opening (<hi>mukha</hi>), progression (<hi>pratimukha</hi>), <pb n=299 id=pb299 facs="f:299">development (<hi>garbha</hi>), pause (<hi>vimarça</hi>), and conclusion (<hi>nirvaha&ndotb;a</hi>), corresponding clearly and closely with the stages<note n=1 id=n299.1>Abhinavagupta (<hi>Dhvany&amacr;loka</hi>, p. 140) frankly treats the Avasth&amacr;s as the Sandhis as parts of the story, and distinguishes the Arthaprak&rdotb;tis. DR. is responsible for the doctrine that each Sandhi rests on an Avasth&amacr; and an Arthaprak&rdotb;ti, accepted in <hi>Prat&amacr;parudr&imacr;ya</hi>, iii. 3; GGA. 1913, pp. 306&ndash;8; R. iii. 26 f.</note> set out above. Thus in the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> the opening extends from Act I to the point in Act II where the general departs; the progression begins with the king&apos;s confession to the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka of his deep love, and extends to the close of Act III. The development occupies Acts IV and V, up to the point where Gautam&imacr; uncovers the face of Çakuntal&amacr;; at this moment the curse darkens the mind of the king, who, instead of rejoicing in reunion with his wife, pauses in reflection, and this pause in the action extends to the close of Act VI, while the conclusion is achieved in the last Act. In the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi> the opening extends to that point in Act II, where Ratn&amacr;val&imacr; decides to depict the king as the only means of gazing on him whom she loves, but from whom she is jealously kept by the queen; the progression extends then to the close of the Act; the development occupies Act III, while the pause, due to the intervention of the queen, is brought to an end by the mock fire of the palace in Act IV, and the remaining portion of that Act gives the conclusion.

<p>So far there is obviously force and reason in the analysis, which, if in needless elaboration, recognizes the essential need of a dramatic conflict, of obstacles to be overcome by the hero and heroine in their efforts to secure abiding union. The classification of elements of the plot is perhaps superfluous beside the junctures; its parallelism to the other two divisions is faulty, for it is admitted that the episode is not confined to the development, as it should be, but may extend into the pause and even into the conclusion.<note n=2 id=n299.2>SD. 321.</note> The episode again is credited with sub-junctures, to be fewer in number than the junctures, and even the incident is permitted on one view to have incomplete junctures.<note n=3 id=n299.3>N. xix. 28; DR. i. 33.</note> But far more complex is the insistence on the subdivision of the five junctures into 64 members (12, 13, 12, 13, and 14 respectively). The distribution, however, has no real value, for, though Rudra&tdotb;a<note n=4 id=n299.4>N. xix. 103; SD. 406.</note> asserts that the members should only be used <pb n=300 id=pb300 facs="f:300">in the juncture to which they are assigned, other authorities decline to admit this view, on the score of the usage of the dramatists, which is the supreme norm. Not all of these members need be used; it is a fault in the <hi>Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</hi> that the poet drags in the separation of Duryodhana from Bh&amacr;numat&imacr; in Act II for no better reason than to comply with the rules.<note n=1 id=n300.1>N. xix. 50 f.; SD. 407.</note> When used, they should be essentially subservient to the sentiment which the piece seeks to create;<note n=2 id=n300.2>SD. 342, 407.</note> they should either treat the subject chosen, expand the plot, increase interest, produce surprise, represent the parties in action, or conceal what should be concealed; the hero or his rival should appear in them, or at any rate they should flow from the germ and lead up to the <hi>dénouement</hi>. Some must be included in any drama, since one without any would be like a man without limbs, and, adroitly used, they may give merit to a mediocre subject-matter. But the definitions and the classifications are without substantial interest or value.

<p>A distinction must be made between such things as can properly be shown on the stage, and such as must only be alluded to.<note n=3 id=n300.3>N. xviii. 16 ff.; DR. i. 51; iii. 31 f.; SD. 278.</note> What is seen should essentially serve to produce the sentiment aimed at, and it must avoid offending the feelings of the audience. Hence it is improper to portray on the stage such events as a national calamity, the downfall of a king, the siege of a town, a battle, killing, or death, all of them painful. It is equally forbidden to depict a marriage or other<note n=4 id=n300.4>The rule is dubious; see Dhanika on DR. iii. 32, where he allows the performance of essential religious rites.</note> religious rite, or such domestic details as eating, sleeping, bathing, or anointing the body, amorous dalliance, scratching with nails or teeth, or such ill-omened things as curses. But these rules are not without exception early or late; if Bh&amacr;sa does not hesitate as in the <hi>&Umacr;rubha&nmacr;ga</hi> to depict death on the stage, R&amacr;jaçekhara in his <hi>Viddhaç&amacr;labhañjik&amacr;</hi> describes the marriage ceremonial in Act III, and in the following Act shows us the wife of C&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a asleep, while the author of the <hi>P&amacr;rvat&imacr;pari&ndotb;aya</hi> does not hesitate to choose as his theme the nuptials of Çiva and P&amacr;rvat&imacr;. Nor do dramatists decline to represent death if the dead person is restored to life, as in the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi>.<note n=5 id=n300.5>Jackson, AJP. xix. 247 ff.</note> A long journey, or calling <pb n=301 id=pb301 facs="f:301">from a distance,<note n=1 id=n301.1>SD. 278, no doubt by misreading.</note> is excluded from representation for obvious reasons of practicability.

<p>Such matters as are appropriate for presentation must be presented in Acts, and each Act must contain only such events as can naturally, or by skilful management, be made to occupy the duration of a single day,<note n=2 id=n301.2>N. xviii. 14 f., 22&ndash;4; DR. iii. 27, 32&ndash;4; SD. 278; R. iii. 205; JAOS. xx. 341 ff.</note> a requisite which is obeyed by Bhavabh&umacr;ti in his <hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi> and by R&amacr;jaçekhara in his <hi>B&amacr;lar&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> despite the difficulties presented by the effort thus to condense the epic. But it is essential that the events described shall not be disconnected; they must flow from the same cause, or issue naturally from one another. There should be an effective development of the plot within the Act; at the time when it comes to an end by the departure of the actors&mdash;three or four at most, one of whom should be the hero&mdash;at the moment when they seemed to have attained their immediate aims, a new motive should come into play, and a fresh impetus be given to the movement of the drama. But it is neither necessary nor usual that Act should follow Act without interval; on the contrary, anything up to a year may intervene between the action of one Act and that of the next; if the events as recorded in history covered more than that time, as in the case of R&amacr;ma&apos;s fourteen years of banishment in the forest, the poet must reduce the period to a year or less. To reveal to the audience the events during such intervals the theory permits a choice of five forms of scenes of introduction (<hi>arthopak&sdotb;epaka</hi>), which serve also to narrate things, whose performance on the stage is forbidden by the etiquette of the drama.<note n=3 id=n301.3>N. xviii. 28, 34 f.; xix. 109&ndash;16; DR. i. 52&ndash;6; SD. 305&ndash;13; R. iii. 178 ff.</note>

<p>Two of these are the Vi&sdotb;kambha or Vi&sdotb;kambhaka and the Praveçaka, which are both explanatory scenes, but between which the theory draws fine distinctions. The Vi&sdotb;kambhaka is performed by not more than two persons,<note n=4 id=n301.4>Bh&amacr;sa has three in several cases; Lindenau, BS. p. 40 says Pr&amacr;krit is never used alone, as stated by Lévi, TI. i. 59, and Konow, ID. p. 13, but see Vatsar&amacr;ja&apos;s <hi>Tripurad&amacr;ha</hi>, II.</note> never of chief rank; it serves to explain the past or the future, and it may be used at the beginning of a drama where it is not desired to arouse sentiment at the outset. It is pure (<hi>çuddha</hi>) if the performers are of <pb n=302 id=pb302 facs="f:302">middle rank and speak Sanskrit; mixed (<hi>sa&mdota;k&imacr;r&ndotb;a</hi>) when the characters are of middle and inferior class and use also Pr&amacr;krit. The Praveçaka cannot be used at the beginning of a drama, and is confined to inferior characters, who use Pr&amacr;krit. Thus in the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> Act III is introduced by a Vi&sdotb;kambhaka, in which a young disciple of the sage Ka&ndotb;va tells us in Sanskrit of the king&apos;s stay at the hermitage, while in Act VI a Praveçaka gives the episode of the fisherman and the police. An abbreviated mode of producing the same result is the C&umacr;lik&amacr;,<note n=1 id=n302.1>R. iii. 185 f. calls Kha&ndotb;&ddotb;ac&umacr;lik&amacr; an exchange of words between one on and one off the stage at the beginning only of an act; e.g. <hi>B&amacr;lar&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, VII.</note> in which a voice from behind the curtain narrates some essential event, as when in Act IV of the <hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi> we learn thus of the defeat of Paraçur&amacr;ma by R&amacr;ma. In the A&nmacr;kamukha, or anticipatory scene, at the close of one Act a character alludes to the subject of the following Act; thus at the end of Act II in the <hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi> Sumantra announces the arrival of Vasi&sdotb;&tdotb;ha, Viçv&amacr;mitra, and Paraçur&amacr;ma, and these three open Act III. A different view is taken by Viçvan&amacr;tha, who makes it out to be a part of an Act in which allusion is made to the subject-matter of the following Acts and the whole plot, as is done in the dialogue of Avalokit&amacr; and K&amacr;mandak&imacr; in Act I of the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>. This is evidently an attempt to justify the treatment of this form of scene as revealing matters which cannot conveniently be depicted on the stage, as well as to distinguish it from the A&nmacr;k&amacr;vat&amacr;ra or continuation scene, in which the action is continued by the characters in the next Act without any break, other than the technical one of the departure of the actors and their return, as at the close of Act I of the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi>. Such a scene obviously in no way answers the purpose of explanation, and its assignment to such an end is clearly erroneous.

<p>Various devices are recognized to help the movement of the intrigue, five of which are classed as internal junctures (<hi>antarasandhi</hi>).<note n=2 id=n302.2>M&amacr;t&rdotb;gupta in <hi>Arthadyotanik&amacr;</hi>, 20.</note> The first of these is the dream, as in the <hi>Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</hi> where Bh&amacr;numat&imacr; is terrified by a vision in which she sees an ichneumon (<hi>nakula</hi>) slay a hundred snakes, dread presage of the fall of the hundred Kauravas before the attack of Nakula and his <pb n=303 id=pb303 facs="f:303">brothers. The letter serves in the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, Act III, to allow the heroine to express her feelings towards the king; she reads it aloud and he overhears it and breaks in upon her; more often it serves the important end of conveying news, leading to dramatic action. A message serves the same end, as when in the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, Act VI, M&amacr;tali brings to the king Indra&apos;s message imploring aid against the demons. A voice from behind the scene (<hi>nepathyokti</hi>) in Act I of that play warns Du&hdotb;&sdotb;anta not to kill the gazelle of the hermitage, and a voice in the air (<hi>&amacr;k&amacr;çabh&amacr;&sdotb;ita</hi>) in Act IV makes known to Ka&ndotb;va on his return the important news of Çakuntal&amacr;&apos;s marriage and approaching motherhood. The <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi><note n=1 id=n303.1>xix. 53&ndash;7, 105&ndash;9; R. iii. 95; 79&ndash;92.</note> ignores the term internal junctures, but has the term special junctures or divisions of junctures (<hi>sandhyantara</hi>) which includes the dream, the letter, and the message, among many other miscellaneous elements; two of these are akin to those already mentioned. The picture is used in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi> as the mode by which the heroine satisfies her longing for her beloved, while V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; discovers Vatsa&apos;s infidelity through seeing the portrait of S&amacr;garik&amacr;, painted beside that of the king by the mischievous Susa&mdota;gat&amacr;. Intoxication (<hi>mada</hi>) may result as in the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi>, Act III, in the letting fall of imprudent words by an important character. Other devices might have been included in the list, such as that of assuming a disguise on the stage, a device used by Har&sdotb;a in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi> and the <hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi> in order to secure the inconstant king uninterrupted interviews with the objects of his temporary affections. The latter play contains in Act III a good example of the embryo Act (<hi>garbh&amacr;&nmacr;ka</hi>),<note n=2 id=n303.2>SD. 279.</note> which is recognized by the theory but not classed as a species of juncture; in it V&amacr;savadatt&amacr; causes her maids of honour to perform before her a play representing her early adventures with Vatsa. So in the <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi> V&amacr;lm&imacr;ki has performed by the Apsarases before R&amacr;ma and Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a the adventures of S&imacr;t&amacr; since her banishment, and the events of her marriage are described in this form in the <hi>B&amacr;lar&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, Act III.

<p>Similarly the theory recognizes as a separate element the pro-episode (<hi>pat&amacr;k&amacr;sth&amacr;naka</hi>),<note n=3 id=n303.3>N. xix. 30&ndash;4; DR. i. 14; SD. 299&ndash;303; R. iii. 15&ndash;17, where N. is cited with variant readings.</note> an equivocal speech or situation which <pb n=304 id=pb304 facs="f:304">foreshadows an event whether near at hand or distant. The <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> distinguishes four kinds of equivoke. An ambiguous situation may result in bringing about the aim of the hero; thus in Act III of the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, when Vatsa hastens to save V&amacr;savadatt&amacr;, as he thinks, from hanging herself, he finds to his equal joy and surprise that he has rescued none other than S&amacr;garik&amacr; herself.<note n=1 id=n304.1>This is differently taken by R. iii. 16 as an allusion to V&amacr;savadatt&amacr;&apos;s anger to come.</note> Or the equivocation may lie in words, whose sense the spectator alone grasps in its deeper application; thus in Act II of the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> a voice behind the scene bids the female Cakrav&amacr;ka say farewell to her spouse, a command whose application to the case of the king and the heroine is immediately appreciated by the audience alone. Or the equivocation may be deliberately conveyed in the response of the actor, whose words apply not merely to the immediate matter in hand, but allude to the future; in the <hi>Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</hi>, Act II, Duryodhana is told of the mishap of the breaking of his standard by the fierce (<hi>bh&imacr;ma</hi>) wind in words which presage his own fall, his thigh broken by Bh&imacr;ma&apos;s blow. Finally we may have a <hi>double entendre</hi> which later is destined to find a third application; in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi> Vatsa playfully suggests that his earnest gaze on the creeper, which has borne blossoms out of season, may cause jealousy in the queen; his words apply equally to a maiden, and in the sequel the queen is made furiously angry by his ardent gaze at S&amacr;garik&amacr;. The <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi> contents itself with two species, equivocation of situation and deliberate equivocation of phrase, but there is general agreement that pro-episodes may be used in any part of the play and not merely in the first four junctures.

<p>Importance attaches to the conventions which enable the author to surmount difficulties inseparable from the dramatic form.<note n=2 id=n304.2>DR. i. 57&ndash;61; SD. 425; R. iii. 200 ff.</note> Normally, of course, the actors speak aloud (<hi>prak&amacr;çam</hi>), to be heard by all those on the stage as well as by the audience, but asides (<hi>svagatam</hi>, <hi>&amacr;tmagatam</hi>) are frequent, meant to be heard by the audience alone. If the need arises for making a remark to be heard by one actor only, it is made in the form of a confidence (<hi>apav&amacr;ritam</hi>, <hi>apav&amacr;rya</hi>), while a private conversation (<hi>jan&amacr;ntikam</hi>) is arranged by the actors holding up three <pb n=305 id=pb305 facs="f:305">fingers, the thumb and ring finger being curved inwards. Or, it is possible to avoid bringing on a person by speaking in the air (<hi>&amacr;k&amacr;çabh&amacr;&sdotb;ita</hi>), pretending to hear the reply, and repeating it before answering it, while a similar purpose can be served by a voice from behind the scene.

<p>The number of Acts which a play should contain varies according to the nature of the drama; in the N&amacr;&tdotb;aka the number must be at least five, and may be ten; in other cases one Act suffices. Normally the Acts are simply numbered; in some cases, as in that of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, names are given, doubtless not by the poet.


<div2 id=ch13.4 n=4>
<head><ab type=divNum>4.</ab> <hi>The Characters</hi></head>

<p>The hero owes his name, N&amacr;yaka, to the fact that it is he who leads (<hi>n&imacr;</hi>) the events to the conclusion which he has set before him, in so far as such a result is permitted by human frailty and the force of circumstances. His good qualities are innumerable<note n=1 id=n305.1>DR. ii. 1; SD. 64; R. i. 61 ff.</note>; he must be modest as is R&amacr;ma in depreciating his own prowess in comparison with that of Paraçur&amacr;ma whom he has vanquished; handsome, generous like J&imacr;m&umacr;tav&amacr;hana, prompt and skilled in action, affable, beloved of his people, of high family, ready of speech, and steadfast. He must be young, and endowed with intelligence, energy, a good memory, skill in the arts, and just pride; a hero, firm, glorious, skilled in the sciences, and an observer of law. More useful is the distinction drawn between types of hero<note n=2 id=n305.2>N. xxiv. (Hall, xxxiv.) 4&ndash;6; DR. ii. 3&ndash;5; SD. 67&ndash;9; R. i. 72&ndash;8.</note>; all are noble or self-controlled (<hi>dh&imacr;ra</hi>), a characteristic not universally found in heroines, but they are distinguished as light-hearted or gay (<hi>lalita</hi>), calm (<hi>ç&amacr;nta</hi>) exalted (<hi>ud&amacr;tta</hi>), and haughty or vehement (<hi>uddhata</hi>).

<p>The light-hearted hero is one free from care, a lover of the arts, and above all a devotee of love; he is normally a king whose public burdens are confided to others, and whose one business it is to secure union with a new favourite by overcoming the obstacles interposed by the not unnatural jealousy of his queen or queens; such beyond all is Vatsa in Bh&amacr;sa and Har&sdotb;a&apos;s dramas. The calm hero differs primarily from the light-hearted hero by reason of his birth, for he is a Brahmin or merchant, such <pb n=306 id=pb306 facs="f:306">as M&amacr;dhava in the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi> and C&amacr;rudatta in the <hi>Daridrac&amacr;rudatta</hi> and the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>; the hero of the Prakara&ndotb;a, or comedy of manners, normally is of this class. The exalted hero is a character of great strength and nobility, firm of purpose, but free from vanity, forbearing, and without egotism. Of such a type are generals, ministers and high officials, and J&imacr;m&umacr;tav&amacr;hana in the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi>. An instructive controversy rages round this description of J&imacr;m&umacr;tav&amacr;hana; to be exalted, it is argued, implies the desire of superiority, but J&imacr;m&umacr;tav&amacr;hana renounces every dream of empire and is a model of calm, of boundless pity, and freedom from passion save, indeed, as regards his love for Malayavat&imacr;, which is inconsistent with the general nature of his character. He should really be ranked among the calm heroes, with the Buddha himself, disregarding the meaningless convention which excludes kings from that category. Dhanika<note n=1 id=n306.1>DR. ii. 4<corr>.</corr></note> effectively defends the classification of J&imacr;m&umacr;tav&amacr;hana by insisting that he is not without desire, namely that of saving others at the cost of his own life; the desires he lays aside are wishes for personal advantage which K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa rightly censures in a king; his love for Malayavat&imacr; is wholly inconsistent with calmness, which, on the contrary, is in fact as in drama a characteristic of Brahmins, and it distinguishes him absolutely from the Buddha, who is exempt from passion. The haughty hero is a victim of pride and jealousy, an adept in magic arts and ruses, self-assertive, fickle, irascible, and boastful; Paraçur&amacr;ma illustrates this character.

<p>The chief hero in any drama must be essentially true to one or other of those types; any change would spoil the unity of the development of the drama, and, if necessary, changes must be made in the plot, as in the case of R&amacr;ma&apos;s dealings with V&amacr;lin, to preserve the unity of character. In the case of the secondary hero there is no need for such consistency; he may change in different situations, and his lack of consistency tends merely to heighten the impression caused by the constancy of the hero. Thus Paraçur&amacr;ma appears in the <hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi><note n=2 id=n306.2>ii. 10, 16; iv. 22.</note> as exalted in his attitude to the evil R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, as haughty towards the untried R&amacr;ma, and as calm when he has experienced the superior prowess of that hero. It is obvious that there is difficulty in conceiving as a chief hero <pb n=307 id=pb307 facs="f:307">one of the haughty type, and the theory does not provide us with one, for Paraçur&amacr;ma is only a secondary hero.

<p>As the Sanskrit drama deals usually with love, the theory has another division of types of hero based on their attitude to women.<note n=1 id=n307.1>DR. ii. 6; SD. 71&ndash;5; R. i. 80&ndash;2. R. i. 79, 83&ndash;8 has a division into husbands, adulterers (<hi>upapati</hi>), and the connoisseur of hetaerae (<hi>vaiçika</hi>). For the courteous lover, see p. 205.</note> The courteous (<hi>dak&sdotb;i&ndotb;a</hi>) hero is one who can find room in his heart for more loves than one; he seeks another to the deep grief of the old, but he does not cease to feel affection for his earlier love; such are the heroes of the N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;, or short heroic comedy, like Vatsa. He may not be regarded as either deceitful (<hi>ça&tdotb;ha</hi>), or shameless (<hi>dh&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;a</hi>), for these two types represent heroes who have ceased to love their former flame, and differ only in so far as they seek to deceive her, or are indifferent to her anger and bear open traces of the new attachment. Men like Vatsa never allow passion to dominate them; if a woman spurns them they are ready to leave her. The fourth type is the loyal (<hi>anuk&umacr;la</hi>) lover who is faithful to one woman only, as is R&amacr;ma. As these four types are applicable to each class of hero, there are sixteen possible kinds of hero, and the theory adds the further complication that each of these may be a high class, middle class, or inferior person, giving forty-eight types.

<p>As if the enumeration of the general characteristics of the hero were insufficient, a set of eight special excellencies<note n=2 id=n307.2>DR. ii. 9&ndash;13; SD. 89&ndash;95; R. i. 215&ndash;19; 64, 69.</note> is enumerated separately as springing from his character (<hi>s&amacr;ttvika</hi>). These are brilliance (<hi>çobh&amacr;</hi>), including compassion for inferiors, emulation with superiors, heroism, and cleverness; vivacity (<hi>vil&amacr;sa</hi>), including a firm step and glance and a laughing voice; grace (<hi>m&amacr;dhurya</hi>) manifested in the display of but slight change of demeanour in trying circumstances; impassivity (<hi>g&amacr;mbh&imacr;rya</hi>) or superiority to emotion; steadfastness (<hi>sthairya</hi>) in accomplishing his object despite obstacles; the sense of honour (<hi>tejas</hi>) which will punish insult even at the cost of life itself; lightheartedness as grace of deportment; and nobility (<hi>aud&amacr;rya</hi>) exhibited in sacrifice for the sake of the good.

<p>The enemy of the hero (<hi>pratin&amacr;yaka</hi>)<note n=3 id=n307.3>DR. ii. 8; SD. 159.</note> is self-controlled and vehement (<hi>dh&imacr;roddhata</hi>); but he is also avaricious, stubborn, criminal, and vicious; such are R&amacr;va&ndotb;a and Duryodhana as contrasted <pb n=308 id=pb308 facs="f:308">with R&amacr;ma and Yudhi&sdotb;&tdotb;hira. On the other hand, the hero of the episode, the companion (<hi>p&imacr;&tdotb;hamarda</hi>)<note n=1 id=n308.1>DR. ii. 7; SD. 76. Cf. <hi><corr sic="K&amacr;mas&umacr;tr&amacr;">K&amacr;mas&umacr;tra</corr></hi>, p. 60; R. i. 89, 90.</note> of the hero, is to possess, but in a less degree, the qualities of the hero; he is to be intelligent, ever in attendance on the hero, and devoted to his interests, as are Makaranda in the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi> and Sugr&imacr;va in the dramas based on the R&amacr;ma legend. The term, however, is unknown to these plays, while in the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi> the nun Kauçik&imacr; is styled a P&imacr;&tdotb;hamardik&amacr;, and serves as a trusted go-between. The theory here seems to have stereotyped a relationship commoner in an older type of drama.

<p>The heroine, N&amacr;yik&amacr;,<note n=2 id=n308.2>DR. ii. 14 f.; SD. 96&ndash;100; R. i. 94&ndash;120, who takes the unusual view that Ir&amacr;vat&imacr; in the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi> is a hetaera.</note> plays a part in the economy of the drama similar to that of the hero, and not of less importance. The types of heroine depend primarily on her relation to the hero; she may be his wife (<hi>sv&amacr;</hi>, <hi>sv&imacr;y&amacr;</hi>) or belong to another (<hi>any&amacr;</hi>, <hi>anyastr&imacr;</hi>) or be a hetaera. The hero&apos;s wife must be upright and of good character, but she may be inexperienced (<hi>mugdh&amacr;</hi>), partly experienced (<hi>madhy&amacr;</hi>), or fully experienced and bold (<hi>pragalbh&amacr;</hi>). The inexperienced wife is shy in her love and gentle in her anger with her spouse&apos;s infidelities. The partly experienced is full of the love of youth, and even faints in her passion; when angry, if self-controlled, she chides her husband with <hi>double entendres</hi>; if but partly controlled, she allows her tears to aid her reproaches; if uncontrolled, she adds harsh words. The bold wife is frantically in love, fainting at the first embrace; when angry, if self-controlled, she adopts an attitude of haughty reserve and indifference to the pleasures of life; if lacking in self-control, she uses threats and blows; if partly self-controlled, she employs the weapons of raillery and <corr sic=equivoque>equivoke</corr>. A further division is possible, for each of these three kinds of heroine may be subdivided according as the lady is the earlier or later of the loves of the husband.

<p>A woman, who is in the power of another, may be the wife of another man or a maiden. An amour with a married woman may not form the subject of the dominant sentiment in the play, but that for a maiden may occur as an element in the principal or the secondary action. Even when a parent or guardian is willing to permit a maiden&apos;s marriage, there may be other obstacles, as in the case of the love of M&amacr;lat&imacr; and M&amacr;dhava and <pb n=309 id=pb309 facs="f:309">in Vatsa&apos;s numerous amours. The woman who is common to all (<hi>s&amacr;dh&amacr;ra&ndotb;&imacr;</hi>) is a courtesan, skilled in the arts, bold, and cunning; she accepts as lovers the rich, the foolish, the self-willed, the selfish, and the impotent so long as their money lasts, then she has them turned out of doors by her mother, who acts as go-between. If she is a heroine, she must be represented as in love, like Vasantasen&amacr; in the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, except in a Prahasana or farce, where she can be depicted as fleecing her lovers for comic effect; she must not figure as a heroine if the hero is divine or royal.

<p>The heroine may occupy eight different relations to her lover.<note n=1 id=n309.1>N. xxii. 197&ndash;206; DR. ii. 22&ndash;5; SD. 113&ndash;21; R. i. 121&ndash;51.</note> She may be his absolute mistress (<hi>sv&amacr;dh&imacr;napatik&amacr;</hi>) and he her obedient slave; she may be awaiting him in full dress (<hi>v&amacr;sakasajj&amacr;</hi>); she may be distressed by his involuntary absence (<hi>virahotka&ndotb;&tdotb;hit&amacr;</hi>), enraged (<hi>kha&ndotb;&ddotb;it&amacr;</hi>) at discovering him disfigured by the marks of her rival&apos;s teeth and nails, or be severed from her beloved by a quarrel (<hi>kalah&amacr;ntarit&amacr;</hi>) and suffer remorse, or be deceived (<hi>vipralabdh&amacr;</hi>) by a lover who fails to meet her at the rendezvous which she has named. Her lover may be absent abroad (<hi>pro&sdotb;itapriy&amacr;</hi>), or she may have to seek him out or press him to come to her (<hi>abhis&amacr;rik&amacr;</hi>), giving as meeting-place a ruined temple, a garden, the house of a go-between, a cemetery, the bank of a stream, or in general any dark place. The first two classes of heroine are bright and gay, the others are wearied, tearful, changing colour, sighing, and wear no ornaments as token of their dejection. A woman, who is subject to another, cannot stand in all these relations to a lover; she may be distressed at his absence, deceived, or driven to seek him out, but she cannot be enraged, for she is not the mistress of her lover, and thus the king&apos;s courtesy to M&amacr;lavik&amacr; in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s play is not to be treated as an effort to appease an enraged heroine.

<p>The heroine is accorded even a more generous allowance of excellencies than the hero.<note n=2 id=n309.2>N. xxii. 4&ndash;29; DR. ii. 28&ndash;39; SD. 126&ndash;55; R. i. 190&ndash;214, with Bhoja&apos;s views.</note> The first three are physical, the first display of emotion in a nature previously exempt (<hi>bh&amacr;va</hi>), the movement of eyes and brows betokening the awakening of love (<hi>h&amacr;va</hi>), and the still more open manifestation of affection. The next seven are inherent characteristics of the heroine; the brilliance of youth and passion; the added touch of loveliness <pb n=310 id=pb310 facs="f:310">given by love, sweetness, radiance, courage, dignity, and self-control. Then come ten graces; the sportive imitation of the movements or words of the beloved one, the swift change of aspect at his arrival, tasteful arrangement of one&apos;s ornaments to increase radiance of appearance, studied confusion of ornaments, hysteria (<hi>kilakiñcita</hi>), in which anger, fear, joy, and tears mingle, manifestations of affection (<hi>mo&tdotb;&tdotb;&amacr;yita</hi>) on hearing the beloved mentioned or seeing his portrait, pretended anger (<hi>ku&tdotb;&tdotb;amita</hi>) on the lover touching hair or lip, affected indifference (<hi>bibboka</hi>), born of excess of pride, a graceful pose (<hi>lalita</hi>), and the bashfulness which forbids speech even when an opportunity presents itself. To these twenty Viçvan&amacr;tha adds eight more graces; the pride which is vain of youth and beauty, the ennui which besets the maiden in her lover&apos;s absence, the <hi>naïveté</hi> which displays itself in pretended ignorance and innocence, the distraction evinced by ornaments in disorder, wandering glances, and truant words, curiosity, the meaningless laugh of youth and high spirits, the tremors of fear causeless but common in the presence of the lover, and the sportive play of young affection. The same source gives us in great detail the modes in which the different types of heroine display their affection, in maidenly modesty or in shameless boldness, an analysis showing keen and deep insight into all the outward manifestations of love at an Indian court. Less praiseworthy is the perverse ingenuity which enumerates the different types of heroine, and educes first 128 from the combination of the eight forms of relationship to the lover with the sixteen kinds based on the division of wife, another&apos;s, and hetaera. These are then multiplied by three on the basis of the division of all characters as high class, middle class, and low class.

<p>The same division of classes is applied to all the other characters (<hi>p&amacr;tra</hi>) which can appear in a play, but a much more fundamental classification is that by sex, masculine, feminine, and neuter. Most of the rôles are such as are incidental to the life of a palace, for the normal drama deals with the amours of a king, and his entourage and that of the queen account for practically all the normal characters of the drama.

<p>The king&apos;s confidant and devoted friend is the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka,<note n=1 id=n310.1>N. xii. 121 f.; xxi. 126; xxiv. 106; DR. ii. 8; SD. 79; R. i. 92.</note> a Brahmin, ludicrous alike in dress, speech, and behaviour. He is a <pb n=311 id=pb311 facs="f:311">misshapen dwarf, baldheaded, with projecting teeth and red eyes, who makes himself ridiculous by his silly chatter in Pr&amacr;krit, and his greed for food and presents of every kind. It is a regular part of the play for the other characters to make fun of him, but he is always by the king&apos;s side, and the latter makes him his confidant in all his affairs of the heart, while the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka repays him by willing, if frequently incompetent or unlucky, attempts at service. The theorists offer no explanation of the anomaly of a Brahmin in such a curious position, but Açvagho&sdotb;a already has the figure, as has Bh&amacr;sa, though not in his epic dramas, and later he is established as almost an essential feature in all dramas not derived from the epic; the chief exception is the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>, where, however, his place is taken by the hero&apos;s friend in sport (<hi>narmasuh&rdotb;d</hi>).

<p>A much less common, but an interesting character is that of the Vi&tdotb;a,<note n=1 id=n311.1>N. xii. 97; xxiv. 104; DR. ii. 8; SD. 78; <hi>K&amacr;mas&umacr;tra</hi>, p. 58; Schmidt, <hi lang=de>Beiträge zur indischen Erotik</hi>, pp. 200 ff.</note> who resembles, though distantly, the parasite of the Greek drama; he is a poet skilled in the arts, especially music, acquainted <hi>au fond</hi> with the ways of hetaerae, in short a perfect man of the world with literary and artistic culture to boot. He is an essential figure in the Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a, or monologue, in which he relates his own shady adventures, but in other forms of drama he plays but a small part; K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa and Bhavabh&umacr;ti ignore him, and, while Har&sdotb;a depicts him in the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi>, his position there is episodic; in the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> alone does he attain full development in his relation to the boastful Çak&amacr;ra. Both these figures appear also in the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi>, Ç&umacr;draka&apos;s model. The Çak&amacr;ra,<note n=2 id=n311.2>N. xii. 130; xxiv. 105; DR. ii. 42; SD. 81.</note> brother of a royal concubine, is of low caste, easily angered and appeased, fond of fine raiment, and proud of his office, in which, however, he shows himself corrupt and incompetent. He is found also in an episode of the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, but then fades from the drama leaving, however, a clear suggestion of its early history.

<p>The king requires in his amours the aid of a messenger (<hi>d&umacr;ta</hi>)<note n=3 id=n311.3>SD. 86 f., 158.</note> as well as for more serious affairs. The holder of this rôle must be possessed of loyalty, energy, courage, a good memory, and adroitness; he may be given full powers to act as seems best in each emergency, or have limited authority, or be a mere bearer <pb n=312 id=pb312 facs="f:312">of a message. Others intimately associated with the royal household are the servants (<hi>ce&tdotb;a</hi>),<note n=1 id=n312.1>N. xxiv. 107; DR. ii. 41; SD. 82.</note> the mercenaries, Kir&amacr;tas or Mlecchas, the chaplain, priest, and other theologians. There are also those employed in the government of the realm, which the king is only too pleased to neglect.<note n=2 id=n312.2>N. xxiv. 60 ff.</note> The minister (<hi>mantrin</hi>, <hi>am&amacr;tya</hi>) is of good family, of high intelligence, skilled in affairs human and divine, and devoted to the interests of the country. The general (<hi>sen&amacr;pati</hi>) is also of high birth, incapable of weakness, skilled in both the theory and the practice of war, and kind of speech; ready to note the weakness of the enemy and to direct at the suitable moment a campaign against him. The judge (<hi>pr&amacr;&ddotb;viv&amacr;ka</hi>) must be master of the laws and of judicial procedure, absolutely impartial, devoted to his duty, free from anger or pride, master of himself. The other officers are required to possess high qualities of intelligence, activity, and devotion to duty, while for less important work the king commands the services of foresters, military officers, and soldiers. The prince royal (<hi>kum&amacr;ra</hi>) and the friend are also mentioned in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, but without detail.

<p>Of women&apos;s rôles<note n=3 id=n312.3>N. xxiv. 15 ff. The <hi>K&amacr;mas&umacr;tra</hi>, of course, covers much the same ground.</note> the most important in dignity is that of the chief queen (<hi>mah&amacr;dev&imacr;</hi>), the equal in age and rank of her husband, whose lapses in affection wound her, without robbing her of her sense of self-respect or dignity. In good fortune or evil she is devoted to him and seeks ever his welfare. The queen (<hi>dev&imacr;</hi>) is also a daughter of a king, but she is more proud than dignified, and, intoxicated by her youth and beauty, her mind is set on the pleasures of love. The favourite (<hi>sv&amacr;min&imacr;</hi>) is the daughter of a general or a minister, seductive by her beauty and intelligence, honoured by the king and others. There are other types of concubine (<hi>sth&amacr;yin&imacr;</hi> and <hi>bhogin&imacr;</hi>) with characteristics but little distinctive. The harem includes also the chief attendants (<hi>&amacr;yukta</hi>), who are charged with the supreme oversight of some department of the court, the king&apos;s personal attendant who is always with him (<hi>anuc&amacr;rik&amacr;</hi>), the maid who performs his toilet and holds over him the umbrella of state, the women&mdash;called sometimes Yavan&imacr;s, once Greek maidens&mdash;who act as his body-guard, and those aged women who are skilled in political traditions <pb n=313 id=pb313 facs="f:313">and are respected on that score. There are also the princess, <hi>ingénue</hi> and modest, and the duenna (<hi>mahattar&amacr;</hi>), who among other things sees to the punctual performance of auspicious rites, and the more humble adepts in the dance, in song, in handicrafts, in acting, and in the favourite amusement of swinging the ladies of the harem. The hetaera is painted in attractive colours; she is thoroughly well educated, exempt from the normal defects of women, kind of heart, adroit, active, a born coquette, and seductive in every way. Special importance among these feminine rôles attaches to that of the heroine&apos;s messenger, the counterpart of the hero&apos;s agent. She may be a friend, a slave, a foster-sister, a neighbour, a workwoman, or an artiste, or strangely enough, a nun, usually of Buddhist connexions, a curious and interesting sidelight on Indian views of the devotees of that faith. The doorkeeper (<hi>prat&imacr;h&amacr;r&imacr;</hi>) has the function of announcing to the king such political events as the declaration of war and the conclusion of peace.

<p>The neuter rôles<note n=1 id=n313.1>N. xxiv. 50 ff.</note> are filled by men who have either taken vows of chastity, or have been deprived of virility in order to permit of their employment in the harem. The Sn&amacr;taka is a Brahmin, who has completed his course of religious study, is familiar with religious and social affairs; he resides within the palace. The chamberlain (<hi>kañcukin</hi>) is an old Brahmin, worn out in the service of the king, but still mentally alert and skilled in his business of conveying the royal orders in the palace. The eunuchs (<hi>var&sdotb;adhara</hi>, <hi>nirmu&ndotb;&ddotb;a</hi>, <hi>upasth&amacr;yika</hi>) are effeminate and cowardly but not lacking in <hi>savoir faire</hi>; they find employment in the king&apos;s amours.

<p>The nomenclature<note n=2 id=n313.2>SD. 426. R. iii. 323&ndash;38 gives very elaborate details.</note> of the characters is in some measure regulated by rule; the name of a hetaera should end in <hi>datt&amacr;</hi>, <hi>sen&amacr;</hi>, or <hi>siddh&amacr;</hi>, as does that of Vasantasen&amacr; in the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi>; that of a merchant in <hi>datta</hi> as in C&amacr;rudatta; that of the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka from spring or a flower, but in the <hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi> he is styled Sa&mdota;tu&sdotb;&tdotb;a; that of a servant, male or female, should be derived from some object, which occurs in descriptions of the seasons, &amp;c., as in the names Kalaha&ndota;sa and Mand&amacr;rik&amacr; in the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>; those of K&amacr;p&amacr;likas, a species of ascetics, should end in <hi>gha&ndotb;&tdotb;a</hi> as in Aghoragha&ndotb;&tdotb;a in the same play.

<pb n=314 id=pb314 facs="f:314"><p>There is also an elaborate etiquette<note n=1 id=n314.1>N. xvii. 73 ff.; DR. ii. 62&ndash;6; SD. 431 ff.; Lévi, TI. i. 129, corrected JA. sér. 9, xix. 97 f.; R. iii. 306&ndash;22.</note> as to the mode of addressing the diverse personages. A king is styled thus by ascetics, but Deva or Sv&amacr;min by his courtiers; his charioteer and Brahmins generally hail him as &Amacr;yu&sdotb;mant<corr>,</corr> &lsquo;long-lived&rsquo;, while inferiors style him Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a, &lsquo;master&rsquo;. The crown prince is styled Sv&amacr;min, like his father; the other princes of the blood (<hi>bhart&rdotb;d&amacr;raka</hi>), but also common people, Bhadramukha or Saumya, preceded by <hi>he</hi> in the latter case, terms designed to conciliate by attributing to those addressed the qualities they are desired to show.<note n=2 id=n314.2>A child may thus be addressed by persons of low rank, SD. 431; cf. <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, x. p. 160.</note> The style Bhagavant, &lsquo;blessed&rsquo;, is appropriate to the gods, to great sages and saints; &Amacr;rya, &lsquo;noble&rsquo;, is appropriate to Brahmins, ministers, and elder brothers, while a wife should address her husband as &Amacr;ryaputra. Sages address an ascetic as S&amacr;dhu; ministers are styled Am&amacr;tya or Saciva; the king calls his Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, and is called by him, Vayasya, &lsquo;friend&rsquo;. Sug&rdotb;h&imacr;t&amacr;bhidha, &lsquo;well named one&rsquo;, is the address<note n=3 id=n314.3>For another style, cf. <hi>H&amacr;syac&umacr;&ddotb;&amacr;ma&ndotb;i</hi>, p. 124; <hi>Up&amacr;dhy&amacr;ya</hi>, R. iii. 309.</note> of a pupil to his master, a son to a father, or a younger to an elder brother, while the latter in return uses T&amacr;ta or Vatsa, both affectionate and condescending terms, suitable also for use to a son, or any person who owes one respect. Heretics should be given the styles they affect, thus a Buddhist should be hailed as Bhadanta; Çakas should be styled by such terms as Bhadradatta. The interjection Ha&ndota;ho may be used between men of middle rank, Ha&ndotb;&ddotb;e between common people. The Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka addresses the queen and her ladies as Bhavat&imacr;; otherwise the queen is styled Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;in&imacr; or Sv&amacr;min&imacr;, a wife as &Amacr;ry&amacr;, a princess Bhart&rdotb;d&amacr;rik&amacr;, a hetaera Ajjuk&amacr;, a go-between or aged dame Amb&amacr;; Hal&amacr; is used between friends of equal rank, Hañj&amacr; is addressed to a servant.


<div2 id=ch13.5 n=5>
<head><ab type=divNum>5.</ab> <hi>The Sentiments</hi></head>

<p>The most original and interesting part of dramatic theory is the gradual definition of the nature of the sentiment which it is the aim of the performance to evoke in the mind of the audience.<note n=4 id=n314.4>P. Regnaud, <hi lang=fr>Rhétorique Sanskrite</hi>, pp. 266 ff.; Jacobi, <corr sic=DMG>ZDMG</corr>. lvi. 394 f.; M. Lindenau, <hi lang=de>Beiträge zur altindischen Rasalehre</hi>, Leipzig, 1913. See N. vi. and vii.; DR. iv.; SD. iii.; R. <corr sic=.>i.</corr> 298&ndash;ii. 265.</note> <pb n=315 id=pb315 facs="f:315">The statement of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> is simple. Sentiment is produced from the union of the determinants (<hi>vibh&amacr;va</hi>), the consequents (<hi>anubh&amacr;va</hi>), and the transitory feelings (<hi>vyabhic&amacr;rin</hi>). The determinants fall in the later classification into two divisions, the fundamental determinants (<hi>&amacr;lambana</hi>) and the excitant determinants (<hi>udd&imacr;pana</hi>); fundamental determinants comprise such things as the heroine or the hero, for without them there can be no creation of sentiment in the audience; excitant determinants are such conditions of place and time and circumstance as serve to foster sentiment when it has arisen, for instance the moon, the cry of the cuckoo, the soft breeze from Malaya, all things which foster the erotic sentiment. The consequents are the external manifestations of feeling, by which the actors exhibit to the audience the minds and hearts of the persons of the drama, such as sidelong glances, a smile, a movement of the arm, and&mdash;though this is but slightly indicated in later texts&mdash;his words.<note n=1 id=n315.1>M&amacr;t&rdotb;gupta (Hall, DR., p. 33) subdivides sentiment as <hi>v&amacr;cika</hi>, produced by words; <hi>nepathya</hi>, generated by appropriate garlands, ornaments, clothes, &amp;c.; <hi>sv&amacr;bh&amacr;vika</hi>, produced by such natural excellencies as beauty, youth, grace, firmness, courage, &amp;c.</note> A special class is later made of those consequents, which are the involuntary product of sympathetic realization of the feeling of the person portrayed, and hence are called S&amacr;ttvika, as arising from a heart which is ready to appreciate the sorrows or joys of another (<hi>sattva</hi>); these are paralysis, fainting, horripilation, perspiration, change of colour, trembling, weeping, and change of voice. The transitory or evanescent feelings are given as thirty-three; they are discouragement, weakness, apprehension, weariness, contentment, stupor, joy, depression, cruelty, anxiety, fright, envy, indignation, arrogance, recollection, death, intoxication, dreaming, sleeping, awakening, shame, epilepsy, distraction, assurance, indolence, agitation, deliberation, dissimulation, sickness, insanity, despair, impatience, and inconstancy. But these factors are not sufficient to account for sentiment, nor does the <hi><corr sic="N&amacr;tyaç&amacr;stra">N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</corr></hi> intend this. It recognizes that an essential element in the production of sentiment is the dominant emotion (<hi>sth&amacr;yibh&amacr;va</hi>) which persists throughout the drama amid the variations of the transitory feelings; it stands to the other factors in the position of the king to his subjects or a master to his pupils, as the Ç&amacr;stra says; it is, says the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi>, the source of delight, and brings into harmony with itself the transitory states of feeling.

<pb n=316 id=pb316 facs="f:316"><p>It is the dominant emotions which in some fashion determine or become sentiments even in the view of the <hi><corr sic="N&amacr;&tdotb;yaçastra">N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</corr></hi>, though in it there is clearly difficulty in conceiving the precise signification of the process, a fact revealed in a tendency to confuse the terms emotion and sentiment, Bh&amacr;va and Rasa. In Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a Lolla&tdotb;a<note n=1 id=n316.1><hi>Ek&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, iii, pp. 86 ff.; <hi>K&amacr;vyaprak&amacr;ça</hi> (ed. 1889), pp. 86 ff. Cf. R., pp. 173&ndash;5.</note> we have a determined effort to make clear the implication of the doctrine. The dominant emotion of love, for instance, generated by a fundamental determinant such as a maiden, inflamed by an excitant determinant such as a pleasant garden, made cognizable by consequents such as sidelong glances and embraces, and strengthened by transitory feelings such as desire, becomes the erotic sentiment first of all in the hero of the drama, e.g. R&amacr;ma. The sentiment is subsequently attributed to the actor who imitates the hero in form, dress, and action, and so it becomes the source of charm to the audience. The fatal objection to this theory is clear; it fails to recognize that the sentiment must be that of the spectator himself; he cannot have enjoyment of a sentiment which exists merely in the actor as a secondary outcome of its existence in R&amacr;ma. Moreover, the actor whose chief aim is to please the audience and earn money need not feel at all the emotions of R&amacr;ma, while, if he does so, he is then in the same position as a spectator.

<p>The view of Lolla&tdotb;a, which is classed as one of the production (<hi>utpatti</hi>) of sentiment and regarded as that of the M&imacr;m&amacr;&ndota;s&amacr; school, is opposed by the doctrine of Çr&imacr;ça&nmacr;kuka, regarded as the Naiy&amacr;yika view, which interprets the manifestation of sentiment as a process of inference. The emotions, love, &amp;c., are inferred to exist in the actor, though not really present in him, by means of the determinants, &amp;c., cleverly exhibited in his acting; the emotion thus inferred, being sensed by the audience, through its exquisite beauty, adds to itself a peculiar charm and thus finally develops into the state of a sentiment in the spectator. This view, however, is open to the fatal objection that it is commonly admitted that it is not inference, or any other derivative mode of knowledge, which produces charm, but perception alone, and no adequate ground exists for disregarding this general truth in this case.

<pb n=317 id=pb317 facs="f:317"><p>In Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;yaka<note n=1 id=n317.1>See also Abhinavagupta, <hi>Dhvanisa&mdota;keta</hi>, pp. 67 f.; <hi>Ala&mdota;k&amacr;rasarvasva</hi>, p. 9.</note> we find yet a different point of view, which denies either the production (<hi>utpatti</hi>) of sentiment, its perception or apprehension (<hi>prat&imacr;ti</hi>) or its revelation (<hi>abhivyakti</hi>). If sentiment is perceived as appertaining to another, then it cannot personally affect oneself. But it cannot be perceived as present in oneself as a result of study of a work about R&amacr;ma; there are no factors present in the self to produce any such result; it is impossible to hold that an emotion dormant in oneself is called to life by seeing or reading the story of R&amacr;ma; experience shows that one&apos;s own beloved does not come up to one&apos;s mind to raise love, nor could a tale of a goddess evoke the picture of a mortal amour; again, such marvellous deeds as R&amacr;ma&apos;s have nothing common to mortal efforts so as to be able to awake conceptions of acts of our own. Thus sentiment cannot be apprehended. Nor is it a case of production; if so, no one would go twice to a play of a pathetic type, since one would experience actual misery as the result, in lieu of a pleasant melancholy; again the sight of lovers united does not in real life produce sentiment. Nor is a case of the revelation of something existing potentially (<hi>çaktir&umacr;pa</hi>). If this were so, then, when the potential emotions were let loose, they would occupy their field of action in diverse degrees&mdash;thus contradicting the nature of sentiment as one; moreover there would be the same difficulties as in the case of apprehension as to whether revelation applied to the hero or oneself. The true solution, therefore, is to ascribe to a poem a peculiar threefold potency of its own, the power of denotation (<hi>abhidh&amacr;</hi>), which deals with what is expressed, the power of realization (<hi>bh&amacr;vakatva</hi>), which relates to the sentiment, and the power of enjoyment (<hi>bhojakatva</hi>), which has regard to the audience. If denotation were all, there would be no difference between poetic figures and manuals, there would be absence of the distinctions produced by divergence of literal and metaphorical sense, and the avoidance of harsh sounds would be needless. As it is, we have the second function of realization of sentiment, which causes the expressed sense to serve as the basis of the sentiment, and confers on the determinants, &amp;c., the essential feature of being appropriated by the audience as universal. From this comes the appreciation by the audience <pb n=318 id=pb318 facs="f:318">of the sentiment, an appreciation consisting in a mental condition made up entirely of the element of goodness or truth (<hi>sattva</hi>), uninfluenced by the other elements of passion (<hi>rajas</hi>) and dullness (<hi>tamas</hi>), that is, entirely free from desire, comparable with meditation on the absolute. This condition is the vital element; the enjoyment ranks above the aesthetic equipment<note n=1 id=n318.1>The term is <hi>vyutpatti</hi>; it is explained by Abhinavagupta, <hi>op. cit.</hi>, p. 70; GGA. 1913, p. 305, n. 1.</note> which renders it possible. To this theory which is sometimes ascribed to the S&amacr;&mdota;khya,<note n=2 id=n318.2>The reference to Brahman shows that we have here the same fusion of doctrine as in Sad&amacr;nanda&apos;s <hi>Ved&amacr;ntas&amacr;ra</hi>.</note> and called the Bhuktiv&amacr;da, doctrine of the enjoyment of sentiment, the objection is made that the two powers ascribed to poetry, realization, and enjoyment, have no legitimate foundation.

<p>The view finally adopted by the theorists is that defended, but not first enunciated, by Abhinavagupta, based on the general doctrine of suggestion (<hi>vyañjan&amacr;</hi>) as lying at the basis of all poetic pleasure. The spectator&apos;s state of mind must be considered; it is in him that from experience of life there come into being emotional complexes, which lie dormant, ready to be called into activity by the reading of poems or by seeing plays performed. Those whose life has left them barren of impressions of emotions are, accordingly, incapable of relishing dramas, a fate which awaits men whose minds are intent merely on grammar or on the complexities of the M&imacr;m&amacr;&ndota;s&amacr;. The sentiment thus excited is peculiar, in that it is essentially universal in character; it is common to all other trained spectators, and it has essentially no personal significance. A sentiment is thus something very different from an ordinary emotion; it is generic and disinterested, while an emotion is individual and immediately personal. An emotion again may be pleasant or painful, but a sentiment is marked by that impersonal joy, characteristic of the contemplation of the supreme being by the adept, a bliss which is absolutely without personal feeling. There is in fact a close parallel between the man of taste (<hi>sah&rdotb;daya</hi>)<note n=3 id=n318.3>In the same sense we have <hi>rasika</hi> and <hi>bh&amacr;vaka</hi> (e.g. R., p. 170).</note> and the adept (<hi>yogin</hi>); both have in them the possibility of attaining this bliss, and, to make it real, the one must investigate the determinants, &amp;c., while the other must apply himself to concentration on the absolute. It is <pb n=319 id=pb319 facs="f:319">this peculiar nature of sentiment which forbids it being created as the result of denotation or indication by speech, of perception, inference, or recollection. It cannot exist without determinants, &amp;c., but these are not in the normal sense causes; an effect can exist when its causes have disappeared, but sentiment exists only while the determinants, &amp;c., last; the terms used in this regard are one and all distinct from the normal terminology of causation. Sentiment is something supernatural (<hi>alaukika</hi>); its relations to the factors may be compared with that of a beverage to the black pepper, candied sugar, camphor, &amp;c., which compose it, but of which as such no trace remains in the liquor as produced. This characteristic enables us to understand how it is that the list of sentiments includes that of horror or odium (<hi>b&imacr;bhatsa</hi>) and that of fear (<hi>bhay&amacr;naka</hi>), as well as the pathetic sentiment. These are awakened into life by things which cause disgust, fear, and grief in ordinary life, and these emotions in real life are far from pleasant in any sense of that term. But, conveyed as ideal and generic, they produce this supernatural pleasure or happiness, which is not to be compared with normal pleasure, just as the joy of the contemplation of the absolute is not to be described as pleasure in the ordinary sense. Bh&amacr;nudatta, in his <hi>Rasatara&nmacr;gi&ndotb;&imacr;</hi>, a work composed before <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1437, distinguishes R&amacr;sa as natural (<hi>laukika</hi>) and supernatural or transcendental; the former is the emotion experienced in ordinary life&mdash;which may more conveniently be distinguished as Bh&amacr;va,&mdash;the latter includes the emotion experienced in dream experiences, in the building of castles in the air, and in the appreciation of poetry, and he is careful to emphasize the totally different nature of the natural and the transcendental emotion.<note n=1 id=n319.1>vi. 7 ff.; Huizinga, <hi lang=nl>De Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka in het indisch tooneel</hi>, pp. 67 ff.</note>

<p>The doctrine set out in Abhinavagupta is also that of the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi>, although it is rendered more obscure there by the brevity of its exposition. The process of transformation of an emotion to a sentiment is formally described; &lsquo;a dominant feeling or emotion becomes a sentiment when it is transformed into an object of enjoyment through the co-operation of the determinants, the consequents, including the involuntary manifestations of feeling, and the transitory feelings&rsquo;.<note n=2 id=n319.2><q><text><body><lg lang=sa-Latn>
    <l><hi>vibh&amacr;vair anubh&amacr;vaiç ca s&amacr;ttvikair vyabhic&amacr;ribhi&hdotb;</hi>
    <l><hi>&amacr;n&imacr;yam&amacr;na&hdotb; sv&amacr;dyatva&mdota; sth&amacr;y&imacr; bh&amacr;vo rasa&hdotb; sm&rdotb;ta&hdotb;.</hi> (iv. 1.) Cf. R. ii. 169.
</lg></body></text></q></note> The sense is made <pb n=320 id=pb320 facs="f:320">further precise by the assertion<note n=1 id=n320.1>iv. 36 ff.</note> that the dominant emotion becomes a sentiment, because it is enjoyed by the spectator of taste, and he is actually at present in existence; the sentiment is not located in the hero whose actions are represented, for he belongs to the past, nor does it appertain to the poem, for that is not the object of the poem&mdash;its function being to set out the determinants, &amp;c., through which the dominant emotion is brought out and generates the sentiment,&mdash;nor is sentiment the apprehension by the spectator of the emotions enacted by the actor, since in that case spectators would feel not sentiment, but an emotion varying in the different individuals, just as in real life from seeing a pair in union those who see them feel according to their nature shame, envy, desire, or aversion. The position of the spectator is compared to that of the child which, when it plays with its clay elephants&mdash;the ancient equivalent of our tin soldiers&mdash;experiences the sensation of its own energy as pleasant; the deeds of Arjuna arouse a like feeling in the spectator&apos;s mind. This experiencing sentiment is a manifestation of that joy which is innate as the true nature of the self, and this manifestation comes into being as the result of the pervasion of the mind of the spectator with the dominant emotion and the determinants, &amp;c., in combination.

<p>An effort is made to describe the precise nature of the mental activity involved in the enjoyment of sentiment, and to base upon it a division of the sentiments. The four sentiments of love, heroism, horror, and fury are taken as primary, and brought into connexion with mental conditions described as the unfolding (<hi>vik&amacr;sa</hi>), expansion (<hi>vistara</hi>), agitation (<hi>k&sdotb;obha</hi>), and movement to and fro (<hi>vik&sdotb;epa</hi>) of the mind.<note n=2 id=n320.2>iv. 41; R., p. 175, l. 1.</note> These are evidently mental conditions, believed to be reached by introspection, and they have the merit of giving a quasi-psychological rationale for the doctrine of four primary and four secondary sentiments found in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>.<note n=3 id=n320.3>vi. 39&ndash;41.</note> But there was no early agreement on this piece of psychology; Abhinavagupta,<note n=4 id=n320.4><hi>Dhvanisa&mdota;keta</hi>, pp. 68, 70.</note> with Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;yaka, accepts only three aspects of mental condition as involved, the melting (<hi>druti</hi>), expansion, and unfolding, a division which is applied also in the theory of poetics to justify the doctrine of the <pb n=321 id=pb321 facs="f:321">existence of three qualities only of words.<note n=1 id=n321.1>See § 6 below.</note> On Dhana&mdota;jaya&apos;s view the sentiment of calm which he denies for drama,<note n=2 id=n321.2>iv. 33. Cf. R., p. 171.</note> if it exists at all, must be regarded as combining all the four mental aspects above distinguished.

<p>It is now possible to understand clearly the essential relation of the spectator to the actors; we see on the stage, for instance, R&amacr;ma and S&imacr;t&amacr;, who excites his affection, aided by suitable circumstances of time and place; this affection is intimated by speech and gesture alike, which indicate both the dominant emotion of love and its transient shapes in the various stages of love requited. The spectacle evokes in the mind of the spectator the impressions of the emotion of love which experience has planted there, and this ideal and generic excitation of the emotion produces in him that sense of joy which is known as sentiment. The fullness of the enjoyment depends essentially on the nature and experience of the spectator, to whom it falls to identify himself with the hero or other character, and thus to experience in ideal form his emotions and feelings. He may even succeed in his effort to the extent that he weeps real tears, feels terror and sorrow, but the sentiment is still one of exquisite joy. We may compare the thrill of pleasure which the most terrifying narration excites in us, and we are all conscious of the sweetness of sad tales.

<p>Viçvan&amacr;tha insists very strongly on the necessity of the identification of the spectator with the personages depicted, a process which enables him to accept without any difficulty such episodes of extraordinary character as Hanumant&apos;s leap over the ocean.<note n=3 id=n321.3>SD. 41. This possibility is denied by Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;yaka.</note> He must not treat the emotion of love as his own, for in that case it would never become a sentiment; it would remain a feeling, and in the case of fear, for instance, it would cause pain, not joy. Nor must he regard it as belonging solely to the hero, for then it would remain his feeling, and in no wise affect the spectator or become a sentiment. Similarly, the determinants, &amp;c., are not to be treated as pertaining to the hero alone; they must be felt as generic. This generic action (<hi>s&amacr;dh&amacr;ra&ndotb;&imacr; k&rdotb;ti</hi>) is the essential feature, replacing the generic power which Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;yaka attributes to poetry. We can now <pb n=322 id=pb322 facs="f:322">see clearly the position of the actor; the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi><note n=1 id=n322.1>xxvi. 18 f. Cf. Aristotle, <hi>Poetics</hi>, xvii. 1455 <hi>a</hi> 30.</note> bids him as far as possible to assume the emotions of the person whom he represents, and to depict them by costume, speech, movements, and gestures as his own, but Viçvan&amacr;tha<note n=2 id=n322.2>SD. 50 ff. So such a great actress as Sarah Bernhardt might feel emotion in acquiring her part, but not in the daily performance.</note> is more anxious to insist that the sentiment is not necessarily to be found in the actor, who often merely performs mechanically his part according to rote and rule; if he actually does experience the feelings he portrays, then he becomes in so far a spectator.<note n=3 id=n322.3><hi>Ek&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, p. 88; DR. iv. 40.</note> Further, he points out the simultaneous presence of all the factors is by no means essential, for the existence of one will revive the others by force of the association of ideas. He insists also on the necessity of experience and cultivation of the power of imagination in one who seeks to enjoy sentiment; as we are by virtue of the doctrine of transmigration&mdash;or if we prefer to modernize, by heredity&mdash;endowed with the germs of the capacity of appreciation, we can normally by study of poetical works develop the capacity, but, if we devote ourselves to the study of grammar or philosophy, we shall certainly deaden our susceptibilities. The difficult problem, why much study of poetry leaves some still unable to relish the sentiment, is explained by the convenient hypothesis that demerit in a previous birth intervenes to frustrate present effort. He refutes at length the effort of Mahiman Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a<note n=4 id=n322.4><hi>Vyaktiviveka</hi> (<hi>Trivandrum Sanskrit Series</hi>, no. v).</note> to destroy the whole doctrine of suggestion in poetry by the doctrine of inference; doubtless by inference we could arrive at a belief in the existence of an emotion in the hero&apos;s mind but that inference would not produce any effect in us or arouse sentiment; a logician might make the inference and draw the correct conclusion, but would remain cold and unmoved. Suggestiveness, he shows, is absolutely essential as a function of words and as the characteristic of poetry, giving it power to create sentiment. What is expressed may be understood by every one; the man of taste alone appreciates the suggestion and enjoys the flavour resulting.

<p>Now sentiment is one, it is a single, ineffable, transcendental joy, but it can be subdivided, not according to its own nature, <pb n=323 id=pb323 facs="f:323">but according to the emotions which evoke it. Thus the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> recognizes the existence of eight emotions or dominant feelings; love (<hi>rati</hi>), mirth (<hi>h&amacr;sa</hi>), anger (<hi>krodha</hi>), sorrow (<hi>çoka</hi>), energy (<hi>uts&amacr;ha</hi>), terror (<hi>bhaya</hi>), disgust (<hi>jugups&amacr;</hi>), and astonishment (<hi>vismaya</hi>), and corresponding to these eight emotions we have eight forms of sentiment. The erotic sentiment (<hi>ç&rdotb;&nmacr;g&amacr;rarasa</hi>) is of two kinds, the union (<hi>sambhoga</hi>) or sundering (<hi>vipralambha</hi>) of two lovers, according to the Ç&amacr;stra and the great mass of theorists, but the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi><note n=1 id=n323.1>iv. 47 ff. Cf. R. ii. 170 ff.</note> distinguishes three cases, privation (<hi>ayoga</hi>), sundering (<hi>viprayoga</hi>), and union. Privation denotes the inability of two young hearts to secure union, because of obstacles to their marriage; such love passes through ten stages,<note n=2 id=n323.2>Cf. Haas, DR., pp. 133, 150; R. ii. 178&ndash;201, where a list of twelve, with desire and eagerness prefixed, is rejected.</note> longing, anxiety, recollection, enumeration of the loved one&apos;s merits, distress, raving, insanity, fever, stupor, and death. Sundering may be due to absence or resentment, and this in its turn may be caused by a quarrel between two determined lovers, or indignation at finding out, by sight, hearing or inference, that one&apos;s lover is devoted to another. The hero may counteract anger by conciliation, by winning over her friends, by gifts, by humility, by indifference, and by distracting her attention. Absence again may be due to business, to accident, or a curse; if the reason is death the love sentiment cannot, in Dhana&mdota;jaya&apos;s view, be present, though others allow of a pathetic variety of this sentiment.<note n=3 id=n323.3>Cf. R., pp. 189 f.</note> In union the lover should avoid vulgarity or annoyance.

<p>The heroic (<hi>v&imacr;ra</hi>) sentiment corresponds to the emotion of energy; it may take the three forms of courage in battle as in R&amacr;ma; compassion as in J&imacr;m&umacr;tav&amacr;hana; and liberality as in Paraçur&amacr;ma. Assurance, contentment, arrogance, and joy are the transitory states connected with it. The sentiment of fury (<hi>raudra</hi>) is based on anger; its transitory states are indignation, intoxication, recollection, inconstancy, envy, cruelty, agitation, and the like. The comic (<hi>h&amacr;sya</hi>) sentiment depends on mirth, which is caused by one&apos;s own or another&apos;s strange appearance, speech, or attire.<note n=4 id=n323.4>Cf. Aristotle, <hi>Poetics</hi>, v. 1449 <hi>a</hi> 36.</note> The transitory states in connexion with it are <pb n=324 id=pb324 facs="f:324">sleeping, indolence, weariness, weakness, and stupor. The sentiment of wonder (<hi>adbhuta</hi>) is based on astonishment; the transitory states are usually joy, agitation, and contentment. The sentiment of terror (<hi>bhay&amacr;naka</hi>) is based on terror; the states associated with it are depression, agitation, distraction, fright, and the like. The pathetic (<hi>karu&ndotb;a</hi>) sentiment is based on sorrow; its associated states are sleeping, epilepsy, depression, sickness, death, indolence, agitation, despair, stupor, insanity, anxiety, and so forth. The sentiment of horror or odium (<hi>b&imacr;bhatsa</hi>) is based on disgust; its associated states are agitation, sickness, apprehension, and the like. In each case the theorists give in full the determinants and the consequents of each emotion, which becomes a sentiment, and a special colour is ascribed to each; it is not surprising to find that red is associated with fury, black with fear; whiteness may, in association with the comic sentiment, be explained by the flashing teeth of a laughing maiden, and the dark (<hi>çy&amacr;ma</hi>) colour of the erotic sentiment is a reflex of the favoured hue of the beloved; grey accords with pathos, but the connexion of yellow with wonder, dark blue with horror, and orange with heroism is not obvious. It is also artificial to find four primary and four secondary sentiments laid down; the erotic, the furious, the heroic, and that of horror, whence in order are supposed to develop the comic, the pathetic, that of wonder and that of terror. The <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> recognizes these eight only,<note n=1 id=n324.1>Save for a late reading in vi. 15.</note> but later authorities add the sentiment of calm (<hi>ç&amacr;nta</hi>) based on indifference to worldly things (<hi>nirveda</hi>), although this is in the Ç&amacr;stra merely a transitory feeling. Those who follow the Ç&amacr;stra contend that there is no such sentiment, for it is impossible to destroy utterly love, hatred, and other feelings, which have been operative from time without beginning; others admit the existence of the sentiment, as does Mamma&tdotb;a, but not in drama, on the ground that indifference to all worldly things is incapable of being represented. But this also is erroneous; the actor&apos;s power of representing indifference is not in point, as it is the spectator who is to feel the sentiment, and the fact that the Ç&amacr;stra places it first in the list of transitory states, though that would normally be an inauspicious beginning, indicates that it was meant to serve both as an emotion and a transitory feeling, <pb n=325 id=pb325 facs="f:325">and it is fully recognized by Vidy&amacr;dhara, Viçvan&amacr;tha, and Jagann&amacr;tha, though Dhana&mdota;jaya barely admits it.<note n=1 id=n325.1>See Dhanika, DR. iv. 33; SD. 240; <hi>Ek&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, pp. 96 ff. Other sentiments are sometimes recognized, such as friendship, faith, and devotion; cf. <hi>Rasaga&nmacr;g&amacr;dhara</hi>, p. 45. Bhoja admits love only. An example of calm is the <hi>Prabodhacandrodaya</hi>. Cf. Jacobi, ZDMG. lvi. 395; R., p. 171.</note> The interrelations of the sentiments, their possible combinations, their harmonies and conflicts, are detailed at length.

<p>The sentiments may all be employed in drama, but there are rules affecting their use. In each play there should be a dominant sentiment; in the N&amacr;&tdotb;aka it should be the erotic or the heroic; other sentiments are merely auxiliary, but that of wonder is especially appropriate in the <hi>dénouement</hi>; indeed something in the way of supernatural intervention is often convenient to extricate the plot. An excess of sentiments is as bad as a defect; if there are too many they destroy the unity of the whole and detach it into a series of ill-connected fragments, while the excessive use of action and of rhetorical display is equally destructive to the merit of a piece.

<p>The <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> illustrates excellently the sentiment of love as the ruling motive of the play; the heroic sentiment appears in the verses in Act II in which the hermits extol the king; the horrible in Act VI in the scene in which M&amacr;tali menaces the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka; terror is evoked by the description of the dusk at the close of Act III; the whole play from the arrival of Ka&ndotb;va in Act IV to the departure of Çakuntal&amacr; produces the sentiment of pathos, while that of fury is called into being by the close of Act VI from the despairing cries of the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka to the entry of M&amacr;tali; finally wonder is aroused by the strange incident at the close when the king picks up the bracelet fallen from the arm of the child which, unknown to him, is his own son by the wife whom he has in ignorance repudiated. The N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;s afford excellent examples of the erotic sentiment; Har&sdotb;a, in complete accord with the rules of the drama, helps out his plot in both the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi> and the <hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi> by the use of incidents evoking the sentiment of wonder; the imprisonment of S&amacr;garik&amacr; in the former play evokes the sentiment of pathos, while terror is excited by the description in Act II of the wild confusion caused by the monkey&apos;s escape from the royal mews. The sentiment of fury is frequently evoked in the <hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi> and the <pb n=326 id=pb326 facs="f:326"><hi>Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</hi>; the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi> affords excellent illustrations evoking horror, while the <hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi> is permeated by the sentiment of heroism. The <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi> reveals heroism in another aspect, that of the perfection of compassion and nobility, for, as we have seen, J&imacr;m&umacr;tav&amacr;hana is not to be regarded as a hero in whom calm prevails.

<p>There is doubtless pedantry in the theory of sentiment; the choice of eight emotions, the subordination to them of transitory states, the enumeration of determinants and consequents, are largely dominated by empiricism, and not explained or justified. But in its essentials the theory may be admitted to be a bold and by no means negligible attempt to indicate the essential character of the emotional effect of drama.


<div2 id=ch13.6 n=6>
<head><ab type=divNum>6.</ab> <hi>The Dramatic Styles and Languages</hi></head>

<p>Plot, characters, and sentiment are not the only constituent elements of drama; the poet must be an adept in adopting the appropriate manner<note n=1 id=n326.1>N. xx. 25&ndash;62; DR. ii. 44&ndash;57; iii. 5; SD. 285<corr sic=.>,</corr> 410&ndash;21; R. i. 244&ndash;94, which expressly denies a fifth manner composed of the four.</note> or style (<hi>v&rdotb;tti</hi>), for each action of the hero; the style adds to the play the indefinable element of perfection which is present in the highest beauty of feature or dress. The manners allowed by the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> are four, the graceful (<hi>kaiçik&imacr;</hi>), the grand (<hi>s&amacr;ttvat&imacr;</hi>), the violent (<hi>&amacr;rabha&tdotb;&imacr;</hi>), and the verbal (<hi>bh&amacr;rat&imacr;</hi>), which owes its name to the fact that, unlike the others, it depends for its effect on words, not action.

<p>The graceful manner is appropriate to the erotic sentiment; it employs song, dance, and lovely raiment, admits both male and female rôles, and depicts love, gallantry, coquetry, and jesting. It admits of four varieties. The first is pleasantry (<hi>narman</hi>), which is based on what is comic in speech, dress, or movement in the actors; the pleasantry may be purely comic, or be mingled with love, or even with fear, as when Susa&mdota;gat&amacr; makes fun of S&amacr;garik&amacr; and adds that she will tell the queen of the episode of the picture.<note n=2 id=n326.2><hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, ii. R. i. 275 gives <hi>p&amacr; p&amacr; p&amacr;hi hi h&imacr;ti</hi> as an instance of comic fear exhibited in speech.</note> When love is mingled, it may serve to evince affection, or to ask for a response, or to impute a fault on the lover&apos;s part. A comedy of costume is seen in the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi> where the Vi&tdotb;a, misled by his <pb n=327 id=pb327 facs="f:327">garments, mistakes the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka for a woman; a comedy of action in the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi> where Nipunik&amacr; punished the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka by dropping on him a stick which he takes, naturally enough, for a snake. The second form is the outburst of affection (<hi>narmasph&umacr;rja</hi>)<note n=1 id=n327.1>Or <hi>narmasphañja</hi>.</note> at the first meeting of lovers, which ends in a note of fear, as in the meeting of the king and M&amacr;lavik&amacr; in Act IV of the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi>. Thirdly, there is the manifestation of a recent love by physical signs (<hi>narmaspho&tdotb;a</hi>),<note n=2 id=n327.2>An alternative is love enjoyment interrupted, as in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, ii. 17; R. i. 278.</note> and, fourth, the development of affection (<hi>narmagarbha</hi>), illustrated by the adoption of a disguise by the hero to attain his end, as when Vatsa in the <hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi> comes on the scene in the garb of Manoram&amacr;.<note n=3 id=n327.3>A variant ascribed to Bharata is given in R. i. 279, where a hero dies and another fills his place, e.g. R&amacr;va&ndotb;a replaced by Vibh&imacr;&sdotb;a&ndotb;a.</note>

<p>The grand manner is appropriate to the sentiments of heroism, wonder, and fury, and in a less degree to the pathetic and erotic. Virtue, courage, self-sacrifice, compassion, and righteousness are its subjects, not sorrow. Its divisions are the challenge (<hi>utth&amacr;paka</hi>), as in the <hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi>, Act V, V&amacr;lin defies R&amacr;ma; breach of alliance (<hi>sa&mdota;gh&amacr;tya</hi>) among one&apos;s foes, which may be brought about by deliberate stratagem, as in the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, or by fate, as in the R&amacr;ma dramas Vibh&imacr;&sdotb;a&ndotb;a severs himself from R&amacr;va&ndotb;a; change of action (<hi>parivartaka</hi>) as when in the <hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi> Paraçur&amacr;ma offers to embrace R&amacr;ma, whom he came to overthrow; and the dialogue (<hi>sa&mdota;l&amacr;pa</hi>) of warriors such as that of R&amacr;ma and Paraçur&amacr;ma in the same play.

<p>The violent manner accords with the sentiments of fury, horror, and terror. It employs magic, conjuration, conflicts, rage, fury, and underhand devices. Its elements include, first, the almost immediate construction (<hi>sa&mdota;k&sdotb;ipti</hi>) of some object by artificial means, such as the elephant of mats made to contain Udayana&apos;s men in the lost <hi>Udayanacarita</hi>; but others interpret this member as a sudden change of hero, whether real, as in the substitution of V&amacr;lin for <corr sic=Sugriva>Sugr&imacr;va</corr>, or merely a change of heart on the hero&apos;s part, as in Paraçur&amacr;ma&apos;s submission to R&amacr;ma; in either case only a secondary hero can change or be changed, else the unity of the drama would disappear. The other elements are the creation of an object by magic means (<hi>vast&umacr;tth&amacr;pana</hi>); the angry meeting of <pb n=328 id=pb328 facs="f:328">two persons who end by fighting (<hi>samphe&tdotb;a</hi>), as do M&amacr;dhava and Aghoragha&ndotb;&tdotb;a in the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>; and a scene of tumultuous disturbance (<hi>avap&amacr;ta</hi>), such as that when the monkey escapes in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi> or of the attack on Vindhyaketu in the <hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi>, Act I.

<p>The verbal manner is based on sound, as the other three are on sense. The voice only is its means of expression; women may not use it, and the men must speak Sanskrit; these actors bear the name Bharata, which is appropriated to this manner. It is adapted to all the sentiments, or, according to the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, only to those of heroism, wonder, and fury. Its elements are, in true scholastic fashion, likewise reckoned as four; two of them, the propitiation (<hi>prarocan&amacr;</hi>), and the introduction (<hi>&amacr;mukha</hi>, <hi>prast&amacr;van&amacr;</hi>), essentially belong to the prologue of the drama, and will be considered in that connexion; the other two are given as the garland (<hi>v&imacr;th&imacr;</hi>) and the farce, which are species of drama. But the theorists agree that the elements (<hi>a&nmacr;ga</hi>) of the garland<note n=1 id=n328.1>N. xviii. 106&ndash;16; DR. iii. 11&ndash;18; SD. 289, 293, 521&ndash;32; R. i. 164&ndash;74.</note> are applicable in any part of the drama, especially the first juncture, and they are evidently an essential part of the verbal manner.

<p>The first element is the abrupt dialogue (<hi>udgh&amacr;tya</hi>), which takes either the form of a series of questions and answers in explanation of something not at once understood, or a monologue of question and reply. The second is continuance (<hi>avalagita</hi>) of one section by another in substitution, as where, when S&imacr;t&amacr; has decided to go to the forest for pleasure, R&amacr;ma is persuaded to let her go indeed, but into exile, or, according to Dhana&mdota;jaya alone, where there is a sudden turn in an event in progress.<note n=2 id=n328.2>The first kind is illustrated by <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi>, i; the second by a citation from the <hi>Chalitar&amacr;ma</hi>.</note> The third is the Prapañca, which passes for a comic dialogue, in which two actors frankly set out each other&apos;s demerits,<note n=3 id=n328.3>As in the <hi>V&imacr;rabhadravij&rdotb;mbha&ndotb;a</hi>, R. i. 168.</note> or, according to Viçvan&amacr;tha, such a clever ruse as that of Nipu&ndotb;ik&amacr; in the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>, Act II, where she worms out from the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka the king&apos;s infatuation. The triple explanation (<hi>trigata</hi>), a term which is used in a different sense in the rule regarding the prologue, seems to denote guesses made at the cause of a sound, which in its character is ambiguous and may be, e.g. the hum of the bees, the cry of the cuckoo, or the music <pb n=329 id=pb329 facs="f:329">made by celestial maidens.<note n=1 id=n329.1>As in the <hi>Abhir&amacr;mar&amacr;ghava</hi>.</note> Cheating (<hi>chala</hi>) denotes the use of words of seeming courtesy but boding ill, as in the inquiry for Duryodhana, their foe, by Bh&imacr;ma and Arjuna in the <hi>Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</hi>, Act V. The repartee (<hi>v&amacr;kkel&imacr;</hi>) produces comic effect in a series of questions and answers; but the same term is applied to the interruption of a sentence by Dhana&mdota;jaya, and by Viçvan&amacr;tha to a single reply to many questions. Outvying (<hi>adhibala</hi> or <hi>atibala</hi>) applies to a dialogue in which those conversing vie with one another in violence, as in the discussion of Arjuna, Bh&imacr;ma, and Duryodhana in the <hi>Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</hi>, Act V. The abrupt remark (<hi>ga&ndotb;&ddotb;a</hi>) is one which intervenes vitally in the tale; thus in the <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi> R&amacr;ma has just declared that separation from S&imacr;t&amacr; would be unbearable, when the porteress announces Durmukha, the spy of the king, who comes to destroy the king&apos;s happiness. Reinterpretation (<hi>avasyandita</hi>) is the taking up of an expression which has escaped one in a different sense; thus in the <hi>Chalitar&amacr;ma</hi>, S&imacr;t&amacr; carelessly tells her sons to go to Ayodhy&amacr; and greet their father, and seeks to remedy this slip by insisting that the king is father of his people. The enigma (<hi>n&amacr;lik&amacr;</hi>) conceals the sense under joking words. Incoherent talk (<hi>asatpral&amacr;pa</hi>) is the speech of one just awake, drunk, asleep, or childish; such are the hero&apos;s words in <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>, Act IV. In another sense, admitted by Viçvan&amacr;tha, it denotes good advice thrown away, as in the <hi>Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</hi>, Act I, G&amacr;ndh&amacr;r&imacr;&apos;s admonition of Duryodhana. Humorous speech (<hi>vy&amacr;h&amacr;ra</hi>) is a remark made for the sake of some one else, which provokes a laugh, as when the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka in the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi>, Act II, by his chatter makes the damsel laugh, and permits the king longer to gaze on her charms. Mildness (<hi>m&rdotb;dava</hi>) denotes the turning of evil into good, or <hi>vice versa</hi>, as when in the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, Act II, the virtues of hunting, a vice in the eyes of the sacred law, are extolled.

<p>It is an essential defect of Indian theory in all its aspects that it tends to divisions which are needless and confusing. Besides the elements of the garland we find thirty-three dramatic ornaments (<hi>n&amacr;&tdotb;y&amacr;la&mdota;k&amacr;ra</hi>)<note n=2 id=n329.2>SD. 471&ndash;503.</note> and thirty-six characteristics or beauties (<hi>lak&sdotb;a&ndotb;a</hi>),<note n=3 id=n329.3>N. xvii. 6&ndash;39; SD. 435&ndash;70; 36 <hi>bh&umacr;&sdotb;a&ndotb;&amacr;ni</hi>, R. iii. 97&ndash;127.</note> which cannot be distinguished as two classes on any <pb n=330 id=pb330 facs="f:330">conceivable theory,<note n=1 id=n330.1>The <hi>Sa&mdota;g&imacr;tad&amacr;modara</hi> merges them in one (Lévi, TI. i. 104). Cf. DR. iv. 78.</note> for both consist largely of modes of exposition and figures of thought and diction, while they also contain, as recognized by Dhana&mdota;jaya, a number of feelings which fall within the sphere of sentiment and its discussion. Thus we find as ornaments the benediction, the lamentation, raillery, the use of argument to support a view (<hi>upapatti</hi>), the prayer, the expression of resolution, the reproach, the provocation, the adduction of a common opinion in order to administer covertly a rebuke, the request, the narrative, reasoning, and the telling of a story. The beauties again include the combination of merits of style with poetic figures; the grouping of letters to make up a name; the use of analogy and example; the citation of admitted facts to refute incorrect views; the fitting of expression to the sense; the explanation by reasoning of a fact which is not capable of sense perception; the description of an object from the point of view of place, time, or shape; the indication of a characteristic which serves to distinguish two objects otherwise alike; the allusion to the truth of the literal meaning of a name; the use of the names of famous persons in a eulogy of some living being; the expression unconsciously, under the influence of passion, of the contrary of what one means; the statement in succession (<hi>m&amacr;l&amacr;</hi>) of several means to attain a desired object; the expression of two different views, one of which in reality strengthens the other; the reproach; the question; the use of commonplaces; eulogy; the employment of a comparison to convey a sense which it is not desired directly to express; the indirect expression of desire; the veiled compliment; and the address of gratitude. Unfortunately no scientific attempt at orderly arrangement or examination of the principles on which these matters are based is attempted.

<p>The <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi><note n=2 id=n330.2>xvii. 40 ff. The Ala&mdota;k&amacr;ra doctrine later develops enormously; cf. Jacobi, GN. 1908, pp. 1 ff.</note> adds an account of four ornaments of the drama (<hi>n&amacr;&tdotb;ak&amacr;la&mdota;k&amacr;ra</hi>), which the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi> ignores, doubtless for the adequate reason that these matters appertain to poetics in general, and they are treated of in vast detail by the text-books of that science. The first is simile, defined as a comparison based on the similarity of characteristics in two objects; there <pb n=331 id=pb331 facs="f:331">are five kinds, the simile which extols, that which condemns, that with an imagined thing, as when the elephant is likened to a winged mountain, that based on similarity, and that on partial similarity, as in &lsquo;Her face is like the full moon, her eyes like the blue lotus&rsquo;. The metaphor is an abridged comparison which unites the two objects so as to efface their distinction, as &lsquo;The fisher Love casts on the ocean of this world his lure, woman&rsquo;. The illuminator (<hi>d&imacr;paka</hi>) is the figure of speech, which uses but one verb to express the connexion between a subject series and a string of qualifications. Of forms of alliteration (<hi>yamaka</hi>), the repetition of vowels and consonants forming different words and meanings, there are enumerated ten kinds, a striking proof of the importance attached to these verbal jingles in early poetics.

<p>The Ç&amacr;stra<note n=1 id=n331.1>xvii. 99 ff.</note> adds some vague and valueless suggestions as to the use of these ornaments and metrical effects in connexion with the expression of the sentiments. The erotic sentiment demands metaphors and D&imacr;pakas, and prefers the &Amacr;ry&amacr; metre. The heroic affects short syllables, similes, and metaphors; in passages of lively dialogue the metres<note n=2 id=n331.2>See Weber, IS. viii. 377 ff.</note> Jagat&imacr;, Atijagat&imacr;, and Sa&mdota;k&rdotb;ti; in scenes of battle and violence, the Utk&rdotb;ti. The sentiment of fury adopts the same metres, and also favours short syllables, similes, and metaphors. The Çakvar&imacr; and Atidh&rdotb;ti metres are appropriate to the pathetic sentiment; it prefers long syllables, a liking shared by the sentiment of horror.

<p>An effort is made by later writers on poetics to apply to the doctrine of the sentiments the theory of excellencies (<hi>gu&ndotb;a</hi>), which is laid down generally in Da&ndotb;&ddotb;in, V&amacr;mana, Bhoja, and other writers. In Da&ndotb;&ddotb;in<note n=3 id=n331.3>i. 41 ff.</note> we find assigned to the Vaidarbha style a miscellaneous number of qualities, ten in all, which are defined in terms sometimes vague and unsatisfactory; these qualities include both those of sense and sound (<hi>artha</hi> and <hi>çabda</hi>). They include strength or majesty (<hi>ojas</hi>), elevation (<hi>ud&amacr;ratva</hi>), clearness (<hi>pras&amacr;da</hi>), precision of exposition (<hi>arthavyakti</hi>), beauty or attractiveness (<hi>k&amacr;nti</hi>), sweetness or elegance (<hi>m&amacr;dhurya</hi>), metaphorical language (<hi>sam&amacr;dhi</hi>), and in the use and combination of sounds homogeneity (<hi>samat&amacr;</hi>), softness (<hi>sukum&amacr;rat&amacr;</hi>), and a natural flow (<hi>çle&sdotb;a</hi>). The chief opponent of the Vaidarbha style is given as the Gau&ddotb;a; it is vaguely credited with the possession <pb n=332 id=pb332 facs="f:332">of features the opposite of those of its rival; more specifically, we find it credited with the fondness for the use of long compounds both in prose and verse, while the Vaidarbha objects to such compounds in verse at least, and with affecting alliterations. V&amacr;mana<note n=1 id=n332.1>iii. i and 2; cf. Regnaud, <hi lang=fr>Rhétorique Sanskrite</hi>, ch. v.</note> develops the doctrine by distinguishing ten qualities of sense and ten of sound, and he ascribes all the qualities to the Vaidarbha style; to the Gau&ddotb;a he allots reliance on force and beauty, to the exclusion of sweetness and softness, while he recognizes as a third style the P&amacr;ñc&amacr;la, which is marked with sweetness and softness, and therefore is rather feeble. In Mamma&tdotb;a<note n=2 id=n332.2><hi>K&amacr;vyaprak&amacr;ça</hi>, pp. 542 ff.; <hi>Ek&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, pp. 147&ndash;9; <hi>Ala&mdota;k&amacr;rasarvasva</hi>, pp. 20 f. R. i. 229&ndash;43 has the ten Gu&ndotb;as and <hi>komal&amacr;</hi>, <hi>ka&tdotb;hin&amacr;</hi>, and <hi>miçr&amacr;</hi> as the three names.</note> and later we find a new view of the qualities; those of sense are explained away as being rather the absence of defects (<hi>do&sdotb;a</hi>), so that the qualities are reduced to the sphere of sound alone. In this regard they are further reduced from ten to three, sweetness, strength, and clearness, and these are now brought into effective connexion with the sentiments.

<p>Sweetness, the source of pleasure, causing as it were the melting of the heart, is appropriate in the sentiments of love in enjoyment, pathos, love in separation, and calm; it is normal in love in union, and rises in degree successively in the other three forms of sentiment; unmixed in the others, in that of calm it is combined with a small degree of strength, because of the relation of the sentiment of calm to the emotion of disgust. Strength causes the expansion of the heart; it rises in vehemence in the sentiments of heroism, horror, and fury, and it is found also in that of terror. The quality of clearness is appropriate to all the sentiments, and is that which causes the sense to become intelligible, pervading the mind as fire does wood or water a cloth, as the outcome of merely hearing the words. The precise mode in which sweetness is produced is by the use of mutes other than cerebrals, with their appropriate nasals, <hi>r</hi> and <hi>&ndotb;</hi> with short vowels, and no compounds or short compounds; strength results from the use of compound letters, doubled letters, conjunct consonants of which <hi>r</hi> forms part, cerebrals other than <hi>&ndotb;</hi>, palatal and cerebral sibilants, and long compounds. The older names, Vaidarbha, Gau&ddotb;a, and P&amacr;ñc&amacr;la are now given up in favour of refined (<hi>upan&amacr;garik&amacr;</hi>), <pb n=333 id=pb333 facs="f:333">harsh (<hi>paru&sdotb;&amacr;</hi>), and soft (<hi>komal&amacr;</hi>). But Mamma&tdotb;a reminds us that in drama very long compounds are undesirable, a rule ignored largely by the later dramatists.

<p>More important than these technical details, which are illustrated often enough in the verses composed by the later dramatists, and no doubt possess considerable antiquity, is the changed view<note n=1 id=n333.1>Mamma&tdotb;a, <hi>K&amacr;vyaprak&amacr;ça</hi>, viii. 1 ff<corr>.</corr>; <hi>Ek&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, v.; <hi>S&amacr;hityadarpa&ndotb;a</hi>, viii; <hi>Ala&mdota;k&amacr;rasarvasva</hi>, p. 7.</note> which brings the qualities in the new sense into relation with the sentiment. Sentiment is the very soul of poetry, and the relation of the qualities to it may be most effectually compared with that of such virtues as heroism to the soul of man. They serve to heighten the effect of the sentiment, and therefore they cannot be considered save in close relation to that sentiment. However soft and sweet the verbal form of a work, none the less it cannot be said to possess the quality of sweetness, unless it has a sentiment to which sweetness is appropriate. To give it the name of sweet, if the sentiment is incompatible with sweetness, is compared with regarding a tall man as brave on the strength of his appearance only. The sounds, therefore, produce the qualities only as instruments, for the real cause is the sentiment, even as the soul is the true cause of the heroism and other qualities of a man.

<p>The case of figures, whether of sound or sense, is somewhat similarly handled; the figures are compared with the ornaments which, placed on a man&apos;s body, and through this union with him, gratify the soul; the figures adorn words and meanings which are parts of poetry by their union with them, and thus serve to heighten the sentiment, provided one exists. If there is no sentiment, through the defective ability of the poet, then the figures serve merely to lend variety to the composition, and even when sentiment exists the figures may fail to be appropriate to it. Both figures and qualities thus are in a very intimate relation with the sentiment, but that does not mean that the two are identical.

<p>From this doctrine, which makes sentiment essentially the main element in poetry, the view of V&amacr;mana,<note n=2 id=n333.2>iii. 1. 1&ndash;3.</note> who laid down that style was the soul of poetry and that the qualities give the essential beauty or distinction (<hi>çobh&amacr;</hi>) to a poem, while the figures <pb n=334 id=pb334 facs="f:334">increase such distinction, is necessarily regarded as inadequate. If the doctrine is interpreted to mean that it is the possession of all the qualities which makes a poem, then all compositions in the Gau&ddotb;a and P&amacr;ñc&amacr;la styles would be denied the rank of poetry; if the presence of a single quality gave the right to the style of poem, then a perfectly prosaic verse passage containing the quality of strength would have to be dubbed a poem, while a stanza containing elegant figures, but no qualities, would be denied that style, which in point of fact is regularly accorded by usage and must be recognized as valid.

<p>As regards language we have, as often in the theory, no explanation of a principle which is laid down as accepted, the divergent use of Sanskrit and Pr&amacr;krit in the same play. Yet it cannot be held that, when the theory was developed in such works as the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi>, and very possibly in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> itself, the usage of the plays could be put down simply to the copying of the actual practice in real life. That such was its origin we may believe in the general way; the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka in the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> derides a woman using Sanskrit as resembling a young cow with a rope through her nose; but there is evidence that already in the time of the <hi>K&amacr;maç&amacr;stra</hi><note n=1 id=n334.1>pp. 57, 60. Cf. Jacobi, <hi>Bhavisattakaha</hi>, pp. 68<corr>.</corr></note> the use of Pr&amacr;krit was artificial. We are there told that the cultured man about town (<hi>n&amacr;garaka</hi>) in social meetings (<hi>go&sdotb;&tdotb;h&imacr;</hi>), should neither confine himself to Sanskrit nor to the vernacular (<hi>deçabh&amacr;&sdotb;&amacr;</hi>) if he is to win repute for good manners. We have here a sign that matters were already, at the time of the <hi>K&amacr;maç&amacr;stra</hi>, much in the same condition as in modern India, where the use of Sanskrit terms with the vernacular is a regular sign of education. Now V&amacr;tsy&amacr;yana tells us clearly that those who frequent such gatherings are hetaerae, Vi&tdotb;as, Vid&umacr;&sdotb;akas, and P&imacr;&tdotb;hamardas, in short the wits of the court, and to them in the theory is assigned Çaurasen&imacr; and kindred Pr&amacr;krit dialects. We are justified, therefore, in assuming that at V&amacr;tsy&amacr;yana&apos;s epoch in actual life, as opposed to the conventional existence of the stage, Pr&amacr;krits were definitely out of employment. The same text includes in the requisites of the knowledge of a hetaera the knowledge of the local speech, and, as there is no doubt of the knowledge of the Andhras as kings by V&amacr;tsy&amacr;yana, it is interesting to note that in the famous passage <pb n=335 id=pb335 facs="f:335">in which Somadeva tells of the reason why the <hi>B&rdotb;hatkath&amacr;</hi><note n=1 id=n335.1>vi. 147. Cf. <hi>K&amacr;vyam&imacr;m&amacr;&ndota;s&amacr;</hi>, pp. 48 ff.</note> was written in Paiç&amacr;c&imacr; he treats as the three forms of human speech contemporaneous with S&amacr;tav&amacr;hana, whose name shows his connexion with the Andhras, Sanskrit, Pr&amacr;krit, and the vernacular.

<p>The date of V&amacr;tsy&amacr;yana thus becomes of interest, but unluckily it is still undefined with any precision.<note n=2 id=n335.2>Jacobi, GN. 1911, pp. 962 f.; 1912, p<corr>.</corr> 841 f.</note> It certainly seems, however, that K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa was familiar with a text very similar to and perhaps identical with the <hi>K&amacr;maç&amacr;stra</hi>, and this reasonably may be regarded as giving <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 400 as the lower limit of date. That the <hi>Kau&tdotb;il&imacr;ya Arthaç&amacr;stra</hi> has been used by V&amacr;tsy&amacr;yana gives no precise result, in view of the difficulty of dating exactly that text. But the mention by V&amacr;tsy&amacr;yana of the &Amacr;bh&imacr;ras<note n=3 id=n335.3>Jacobi, <hi>Bhavisattakaha</hi>, pp. 74, 76. Cf. Haranchandra <corr sic=Chaklardar>Chakladar</corr>, <hi>V&amacr;tsy&amacr;yana</hi> (1921).</note> and Andhras certainly suggests, taken into conjunction with his silence as to the Guptas, that he wrote before the power of the latter had established itself in western India, and we may assign his work to approximately <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 300. If so we must believe that already in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s age the Pr&amacr;krits of his characters were more or less artificial, and with this well accords his introduction of M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr; for the verses of those to whom Çaurasen&imacr; is assigned in prose, an obviously literary device.

<p>Elaborate rules for the use of language<note n=4 id=n335.4>N. xvii. 31 ff.; DR. ii. 58&ndash;61; SD. 432; R. iii. 299&ndash;305.</note> by the characters are given in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> and, in much less detail, by the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi>. The use of Sanskrit is proper in the case of kings, Brahmins, generals, ministers, and learned persons generally; the chief queen is assigned it, and so also ministers&apos; daughters, but this rule is not in practice observed. On the other hand, it is used by Buddhist nuns, hetaerae, artistes, and others on occasion. It is a rule that in the description of battles, peace negotiations, and omens Sanskrit shall be resorted to, and this is done by B&rdotb;hannal&amacr; in Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s <hi>Pañcar&amacr;tra</hi>. The use of Sanskrit by allegorical female types is also found both early and late.

<p>The general rule for women and persons of inferior rank<note n=5 id=n335.5>Including, of course, persons assuming such rôles, e.g. in the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> and <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>. For the use of Sanskrit by women, usually in verse, as by Vasantasen&amacr; in the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, and by inferior characters, see Pischel, <hi>Pr&amacr;krit Grammatik</hi>, pp. 31 f.</note> is <pb n=336 id=pb336 facs="f:336">the use of Pr&amacr;krit, but it may be resorted to as a means of self-aid by persons of higher position. The types of Pr&amacr;krit to be used are described with much confusion in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, and the amount of variation contemplated is large. Thus the use of Çaurasen&imacr; is permitted in the Ç&amacr;stra in lieu of the dialect of the Barbara, Andhra, Kir&amacr;ta, and Dravi&ddotb;a, though these may be used. The Ç&amacr;stra gives seven different Pr&amacr;krits as in use. Çaurasen&imacr; is the speech of the land between the Yamun&amacr; and the Ga&nmacr;g&amacr; or Doab; it is to be used by the ladies of the play, their friends and servants, generally by ladies of good family and many men of the middle class. Pr&amacr;cy&amacr; is assigned to the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, but in fact he speaks practically Çaurasen&imacr;, and therefore the term can only denote an eastern Çaurasen&imacr; dialect. &Amacr;vant&imacr; is ascribed to gamblers or rogues (<hi>dh&umacr;rta</hi>), but is only an aspect of Çaurasen&imacr;, as spoken at Ujjayin&imacr;, and the Pr&amacr;krit grammarian M&amacr;rka&ndotb;&ddotb;eya calls it a transition between Çaurasen&imacr; and M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr;. M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr; is unknown to the Ç&amacr;stra; it is assigned to the verses of persons who use Çaurasen&imacr; by the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi>, while the <hi>S&amacr;hityadarpa&ndotb;a</hi> limits it to the verses of women; normally, but not absolutely, it is used in all verses,<note n=1 id=n336.1>R. iii. 300 assigns it as Pr&amacr;k&rdotb;ta to low persons and Jains. He assigns Apabhra&ndota;ça to Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;las, Yavanas, &amp;c., but admits that others give M&amacr;gadh&imacr;, &amp;c.</note> though Çaurasen&imacr; verses occasionally occur, and possibly were more frequent originally. The earlier drama of Açvagho&sdotb;a and Bh&amacr;sa has no clear evidence of M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr; at all. Ardha-M&amacr;gadh&imacr; is prescribed for slaves (<hi>ce&tdotb;a</hi>), R&amacr;japutras and guildsmen (<hi>çre&sdotb;&tdotb;hin</hi>) by the Ç&amacr;stra, but, save in Açvagho&sdotb;a and possibly the <hi>Kar&ndotb;abh&amacr;ra</hi> of Bh&amacr;sa, it is unknown to our dramas. M&amacr;gadh&imacr;, on the other hand, is important in theory, and of some consequence in practice; it is ascribed to all those men who live in the women&apos;s apartments, diggers of underground passages, keepers of drink shops, watchers, and is used in time of danger by the hero, and also by the Çak&amacr;ra, according to the Ç&amacr;stra. The <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi> assigns it and Paiç&amacr;c&imacr; to the lowest classes, which accords with facts as regards M&amacr;gadh&imacr;, but Paiç&amacr;c&imacr; is not found clearly in the dramas.

<p>The <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> provides for the use of D&amacr;k&sdotb;i&ndotb;&amacr;ty&amacr; in the case of soldiers (<hi>yodha</hi>), police officers (<hi>n&amacr;garaka</hi>), and gamblers (<hi>d&imacr;vyant</hi>), and there are slight traces in the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> of the existence of this dialect. B&amacr;lh&imacr;k&amacr; is assigned by the same <pb n=337 id=pb337 facs="f:337">authority to the Khasas and the northerners, but has not yet been traced in any drama.

<p>We learn also from the Ç&amacr;stra and from M&amacr;rka&ndotb;&ddotb;eya in special of a number of Vibh&amacr;&sdotb;&amacr;s,<note n=1 id=n337.1>Grierson, JRAS. 1918, pp. 489 ff. Cf. R. i. 297 which has seven; Çabara, Drami&ldotb;a, Andhraja, Çak&amacr;ra, Abh&imacr;ra, Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;la, foresters.</note> which seem to be modified forms of the more normal Pr&amacr;krits, as stereotyped for use by certain characters in the drama. Thus the Ç&amacr;stra attributes Ç&amacr;k&amacr;r&imacr; to the Çakas, Çabaras, and others, while the <hi>S&amacr;hityadarpa&ndotb;a</hi> accords Ç&amacr;bar&imacr; to these persons. The Ç&amacr;stra ascribes Ç&amacr;bar&imacr; to charcoal-burners, hunters, wood-workers, and partly also to forest dwellers in general, and &Amacr;bh&imacr;r&imacr; is ascribed with the option of Ç&amacr;bar&imacr; to herdsmen, C&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;l&imacr; to Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;las, and Dr&amacr;vi&ddotb;&imacr; to Dravi&ddotb;as, while O&ddotb;ri, mentioned by the Ç&amacr;stra, is left unascribed; presumably it was assigned to men of Orissa. Something of this is seen in the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, where Ç&amacr;k&amacr;r&imacr;, C&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;l&imacr;, and a further speech &Ddotb;hakk&imacr; or &Tdotb;&amacr;kk&imacr; appear. They all have nothing very marked as to their characteristics; the first two may be allied to M&amacr;gadh&imacr;, the last is more dubious.

<p>The addition of Ch&amacr;y&amacr;s or translations in Sanskrit to explain the Pr&amacr;krit is normal in the manuscripts of the dramas, and it is certain that it is old, for it is alluded to by R&amacr;jaçekhara in his <hi>B&amacr;lar&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>. Evidently, even so early as <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 900, there was no public which cared for Pr&amacr;krit without a Sanskrit explanation.

<p>On the subject of the use of stanzas, as opposed to prose, the text-books are curiously and unexpectedly silent.<note n=2 id=n337.2>Contrast the Aristotelian doctrine as to the use of the lyric choruses; <hi>Poetics</hi>, 1456 <hi>a</hi> 25 ff.; G. Norwood, <hi>Greek Tragedy</hi>, pp. 75&ndash;80; Haigh, <hi>The Tragic Drama of the Greeks</hi>, ch. v, § 6.</note> This indicates how entirely empirical they are in these matters. The use of Pr&amacr;krits in the dramas obviously varied, and something had to be said regarding this point, but the alternation of prose and verse is accepted as something established, on which comment is unnecessary. The fact is recognized, but its implications and purpose remain unexplored. In the stanzas themselves, it is clear, we must distinguish between those which were sung and those which were simply recited; recitation must clearly have been the normal form of use, and as sung we have normally at any rate only some of the stanzas in M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr; which are placed in the mouths of women. Çaurasen&imacr; stanzas, on the other hand, <pb n=338 id=pb338 facs="f:338">we may assume to have been recited, but the distinction has practically vanished from the texts preserved.


<div2 id=ch13.7 n=7>
<head><ab type=divNum>7.</ab> <hi>The Dance, Song, and Music</hi></head>

<p>Of the part played by the song, dance, and music in the drama the theorists curiously enough tell us comparatively little of interest, though it is certain that both were most important elements in the production of sentiment. The types of dance recognized in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> are two, the violent dance of men, invented by Çiva himself, the T&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;ava, and the tender and voluptuous dance of P&amacr;rvat&imacr;, the L&amacr;sya. The latter alone, by reason of its special importance, is carefully analysed into ten parts by the Ç&amacr;stra,<note n=1 id=n338.1>xviii. 117&ndash;29; DR. iii. 47 f.; SD. 504&ndash;9. On gesture see the <hi>Abhinayadarpa&ndotb;a</hi> of Nandikeçvara, trs. Cambridge, Mass., 1917. R. iii. 236&ndash;48 gives other details of the L&amacr;sya from the <hi>Ç&rdotb;&nmacr;g&amacr;ramañjar&imacr;</hi>; dialect is allowed in the <corr sic="Saindh&amacr;va">Saindhava</corr>. He follows N. in having Trim&umacr;&ddotb;haka as expressing male emotions in smooth words, and has Dvim&umacr;&ddotb;haka.</note> which shows the essential union of song and dance. The first is the song proper, which is sung by one seated, to the accompaniment of a lute, without dancing; the recitation standing (<hi>sthitap&amacr;&tdotb;hya</hi>) is a declamation in Pr&amacr;krit by a woman pacing rapidly under the influence of love, or it may also mean, according to Abhinavagupta, a declamation by a woman in anger. The recitation sitting (<hi>&amacr;s&imacr;na</hi>) is performed by a woman lying down, under the stress of sorrow, without musical accompaniment. In the Pu&sdotb;paga&ndotb;&ddotb;ik&amacr; various metres are used; Sanskrit may be employed; men act as women and <hi>vice versa</hi>, and there is a musical accompaniment. In the Pracchedaka a woman sings to the lute her grief at her lover&apos;s infidelity. The Trig&umacr;&ddotb;ha is the acting of a man in woman&apos;s dress, as of Makaranda in the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>, Act VI. The Saindhava is a song to a clear accompaniment of a lady whose love has failed to keep his tryst. The Dvig&umacr;&ddotb;haka is a harmonious song, full of sentiment, in dialogue form. The Uttamottaka is a song filled with the bitterness of a troubled love. The Uktapratyukta is a duet, in which one lover addresses to the other feigned reproaches. These divisions, of course, appear to ignore their nature as parts of a dance, but it must be remembered that the motions of the performers are essential in the performance.

<pb n=339 id=pb339 facs="f:339"><p>The music of the drama is not described at length in the later theorists; what is clear is that each sentiment has its special appropriate music, and each action its special accompaniment. Thus the Dvipadik&amacr;s accompanied the performance of the rôles of persons distressed, unwell, and unhappy; the Dhruv&amacr;s were chosen so as to intimate at once to the audience the quality of the new arrival on the stage.<note n=1 id=n339.1>Lévi, TI. ii. 18 f. For N. xxviii see J. Grosset, <hi lang=fr>Contribution <corr sic=a>à</corr> l&apos;étude de la musique hindoue</hi>, Paris, 1888. The hints as to musical accompaniment in <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi> iv. and the <hi>G&imacr;tagovinda</hi> are unfortunately largely unintelligible. Cf. also Çivar&amacr;ma on <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi>, i. 15.</note>


<div2 id=ch13.8 n=8>
<head><ab type=divNum>8.</ab> <hi>The Preliminaries and the Prologue</hi></head>

<p>The <hi><corr sic="Na&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra">N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</corr></hi><note n=2 id=n339.2>v. 1 ff.; Konow, ID., pp. 23 ff.</note> prescribes an elaborate series of preliminaries (<hi>p&umacr;rvara&nmacr;ga</hi>) which must be performed before the actual drama begins; they are intended to secure divine favour for the performance, each act having a definite share in the result, and doubtless they present us with a reminiscence of the early theatre in the mingling of music, dance, and song. First there is the beat of drum (<hi>praty&amacr;h&amacr;ra</hi>) announcing the beginning of the performance, and the carpet is spread out for the orchestra; the singers and the musicians then enter and take their places (<hi>avatara&ndotb;a</hi>): then the chorus try their voices (<hi>&amacr;rambha</hi>); the musicians try their instruments (<hi>&amacr;çr&amacr;va&ndotb;&amacr;</hi>); they tune up their wind and string instruments, and manipulate their hands to make them ready for the work; then an instrumental concert follows, succeeded by the appearance and practice steps of the dancers.<note n=3 id=n339.3>These nine acts gratify the Apsarases, Gandharvas, Daityas, D&amacr;navas, Rak&sdotb;ases, Guhyakas, and Yak&sdotb;as. They are performed behind the curtain according to Konow, but cf. Lévi, TI. i. 376.</note> A song follows, to please the gods; then the T&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;ava is performed, increasing in violence as it proceeds; then a song accompanies the raising by the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra of the banner (<hi>jarjara</hi>) of Indra; he scatters flowers and purifies himself with water from a pitcher borne by an attendant, while another carries the banner; there follows a perambulation of the stage, the praise of the world guardians, and homage to the banner. Then comes the N&amacr;nd&imacr; or benediction; it is followed by the recitation by the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra of a verse in honour of the god whose festival it is, <pb n=340 id=pb340 facs="f:340">or the king or a Brahmin; then comes the Ra&nmacr;gadv&amacr;ra, which is said to mark the beginning of the dramatic action (<hi>abhinaya</hi>), the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra reciting another verse, and bowing before the banner of Indra. There follow steps and movements of erotic character (<hi>c&amacr;r&imacr;</hi>) in honour of Um&amacr;, and more violent movements of the same kind in honour of the Bh&umacr;tas. A discussion (<hi>trigata</hi>) between the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra, the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, who talks nonsense, and an attendant follows. Finally the Prarocan&amacr; announces the content of the drama, and the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra and his two attendants leave the stage, and the preliminaries are ended.

<p>Immediately after, according to the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, another person, similar in appearance and qualities to the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra, is to enter and introduce the play, a function which gives him the style of introducer, Sth&amacr;paka.<note n=1 id=n340.1>N. v. 149 ff.; DR. iii. 2 ff.; SD. 283 ff. Cf. R. iii. 150 ff.</note> His costume should indicate the nature of the drama, as dealing with divine or human affairs. An appropriate song greets his entrance, he dances a C&amacr;r&imacr;, praises the gods and Brahmins, propitiates the audience by verses alluding to the subject of the play, mentions the name of the author and the play, and describes some season in the verbal manner, thereby opening the prologue (<hi>prast&amacr;van&amacr;</hi>, <hi>&amacr;mukha</hi>, <hi>sth&amacr;pan&amacr;</hi>)<note n=2 id=n340.2>An effort to discriminate Prast&amacr;van&amacr; and Sth&amacr;pan&amacr; is made, R. iii. 158.</note> of the play. The essential feature of the prologue is an address by the director with an attendant (<hi>p&amacr;rip&amacr;rçvika</hi>) or an actress or the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka on some personal business which indirectly hints at the drama. The mode of connexion is given by Dhana&mdota;jaya as threefold, as in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>; the words of the director may be caught up (<hi>kathodgh&amacr;ta</hi>) by a character in the drama, entering from behind the curtain, as in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi> Yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a catches up the consolation offered to the actress which is applicable to his own scheme, and in the <hi>Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</hi> Bh&imacr;ma brusquely denounces the benediction of his adversaries. Or a person may enter (<hi>prav&rdotb;ttaka</hi>), who has just been mentioned by the director in a comparison with the season of the year, as in the <hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi>. Excess of representation (<hi>prayog&amacr;tiçaya</hi>) is taken in the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi> as applying to a case where the director actually mentions the entry of a character of the drama, as at the beginning of the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, where he assures the actress that her song has enchanted him, as the <pb n=341 id=pb341 facs="f:341">gazelle enchants Du&hdotb;&sdotb;anta, who just then enters. Viçvan&amacr;tha, on the other hand, treats this form as an instance of continuance (<hi>avalagita</hi>), and interprets the phrase as denoting the supersession of the director&apos;s action; thus, in the lost <hi>Kundam&amacr;l&amacr;</hi>, about to call on the actress to dance, he hears the word, &lsquo;Lady, descend&rsquo;, and realizes that it is a reference to S&imacr;t&amacr;, who is being led into exile. He admits also the abrupt dialogue (<hi>udgh&amacr;tya</hi>) as a means of connexion; thus in the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi> the director alludes to the demon of eclipse as eager to triumph over Candra, the moon, and C&amacr;&ndotb;akya behind the scenes calls out, &lsquo;Who then while I live claims to triumph over Candragupta?&rsquo; and enters a moment later. The theorist Nakhaku&tdotb;&tdotb;a is also credited with the view that a voice behind the scenes or from the air may be used to introduce the chief personage.

<p>This account of the preliminaries and the prelude presents obvious difficulties both in itself and in connexion with the actual specimens of the Sanskrit drama. The <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi> and Viçvan&amacr;tha alike give no details of the preliminaries, and the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> indicates that, in addition to the complete form of P&umacr;rvara&nmacr;ga, there might be an abbreviated form and also an extended form with additional ceremonials. There is an obvious overlapping between the P&umacr;rvara&nmacr;ga and the rest of the performance, for the last element of the former, the giving the content of the drama in the Prarocan&amacr;, is essentially an element in the latter. We are quite definitely told by Viçvan&amacr;tha that in his time there was not a complete performance of the preliminaries; when, therefore, we find in Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s dramas that there is no mention of the name of the author or the drama in the prologue, we may safely assume that it was after his time that the practice grew up of transferring from the preliminaries, which were not a matter for the poet, the substance of the Prarocan&amacr;, and embodying it in the poet&apos;s own work. In Viçvan&amacr;tha&apos;s time also we are told that the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra or director performed the whole of the work assigned in the theory to him and the Sth&amacr;paka. But it is extremely difficult to say how far back this goes; the extant dramas with occasional exceptions,<note n=1 id=n341.1>These are more common than formerly thought; the Sth&amacr;paka is found in various connexions in the <hi>P&amacr;rthapar&amacr;krama</hi> of Prahl&amacr;dana, and Vatsar&amacr;ja&apos;s <hi>Kir&amacr;t&amacr;rjun&imacr;ya</hi>, <hi>Rukmi&ndotb;&imacr;hara&ndotb;a</hi>, <hi>Samudramathana</hi>. But the <hi>Ras&amacr;r&ndotb;avasudh&amacr;kara</hi> ignores him. <pb n=342 id=pb342n facs="f:342">Çivar&amacr;ma&apos;s comm. on <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi>, i. 1 shows that great doubt then existed both as to the preliminaries (p. 2), and the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra, S&umacr;caka, or Sth&amacr;paka (pp. 6, 7). Cf. p. 273.</note> such as R&amacr;jaçekhara&apos;s <hi>Karp&umacr;ramañjar&imacr;</hi> <pb n=342 id=pb342 facs="f:342">and M&amacr;dhava&apos;s <hi>Subhadr&amacr;hara&ndotb;a</hi> mention only the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra, and Pischel<note n=1 id=n342.1>GGA. 1883, p. 1234; 1891, p. 361. Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s use of Sth&amacr;pan&amacr; for the prologue suggests accord with the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi>.</note> suggested that it was Bh&amacr;sa who banished the Sth&amacr;paka, in view of the reference in B&amacr;&ndotb;a to his dramas as begun by the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra. It is uncertain, however, what precisely the sense of this reference is. The <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi> expressly provides for the activity of the Sth&amacr;paka, but then proceeds to style him S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra, and there is agreement that he is to have the attributes of the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra, so that the use of the name may merely be explained by this reason. This is certainly supported by the express reference in the <hi>S&amacr;hityadarpa&ndotb;a</hi> to the transfer of his functions to the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra and the silence of the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi> on this head. The point would be of importance only if it meant that Bh&amacr;sa dropped the P&umacr;rvara&nmacr;ga as part of the drama; nothing, however, even hints at this; as we have seen, his omission to name himself or his play in the prologue tells strongly in favour of the view that the old Prarocan&amacr; was still in use.

<p>More complex still is the question of the N&amacr;nd&imacr; or benediction. Most Sanskrit dramas open with a verse or verses of this type, followed by the remark, &lsquo;At the close of the N&amacr;nd&imacr; the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra enters,&rsquo; but in Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s dramas, in old manuscripts of the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>, and now and then in South Indian manuscripts of such plays as the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi>, the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, and other more modern dramas,<note n=2 id=n342.2>E.g. <hi>Tapat&imacr;sa&mdota;vara&ndotb;a</hi> and <hi>Subhadr&amacr;dhana&mdota;jaya</hi>, where Sth&amacr;pan&amacr; is used.</note> we find the play begun with these words, and a verse or verses following. We have also the direct testimony of Viçvan&amacr;tha, who tells us that some authorities held that the introductory verse in the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi> which normally passes for the N&amacr;nd&imacr; was not that at all, but was the Ra&nmacr;gadv&amacr;ra, with which, according to the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, the play properly begins, as in it we first find acting in the shape of a combination of speech and action; that verse, they argued, could not be reconciled with the definition of the extent of the N&amacr;nd&imacr; given in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>; others, however, on the authority of Abhinavagupta repelled this objection. Viçvan&amacr;tha adopts as the definition of N&amacr;nd&imacr; what is recited in praise of a deity, Brahmin, king <pb n=343 id=pb343 facs="f:343">or the like, and is accompanied by a benediction, consisting of twelve inflected words (with nominal or verbal endings) or eight lines (quarter-verses); this would exclude the beginning of the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>, but Abhinavagupta permits of a greater variety of forms. In Viçvan&amacr;tha&apos;s view the N&amacr;nd&imacr; is part of the preliminaries, which must be preserved, however much these are shortened. It is clear, therefore, that gradually the benediction, like the Prarocan&amacr; with its appeal to the benevolence of the audience,<note n=1 id=n343.1>A classification of poets on the basis of their confidence in themselves as expressed in this place is given in R. i. 246 f.; K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa is elevated (<hi>ud&amacr;tta</hi>) in the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi>; Bhavabh&umacr;ti haughty (<hi>uddhata</hi>) in the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>; self assertion (<hi>prau&ddotb;ha</hi>) is seen in the <hi>Karu&ndotb;&amacr;kandala</hi>; modesty (<hi>vin&imacr;ta</hi>) in the <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;nanda</hi>.</note> came to be worked into the play by the author himself, though the period when the custom became normal cannot be stated with any precision, and in the south of India, at any rate, the older practice of leaving the benediction to the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra seems to have been sometimes followed. There can, indeed, be little doubt that the extent to which the preliminaries were retained differed from time to time; Viçvan&amacr;tha evidently contemplates their almost total disappearance, but the <hi>Am&rdotb;todaya</hi> of Gokulan&amacr;tha in the sixteenth century assumes their presence; the authority of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> told heavily in their favour, and the stock phrase, &lsquo;Enough of this ceremony,&rsquo; which occurs frequently at the opening of the plays, doubtless refers to the dance, song, and music with which the drama was prefaced.<note n=2 id=n343.2>Konow, ID. p. 25.</note>

<p>These facts explain the confusion<note n=3 id=n343.3>Lévi, TI. i. 135, 379; ii. 26 f., 64, 66. Cf. <hi>Hariva&ndota;ça</hi>, ii. 93; <hi>Ku&tdotb;&tdotb;an&imacr;mata</hi>, 856 ff.</note> of the notices of the theorists as to the actor by whom the benediction is to be recited. We find ascribed to Bharata the view that a special actor, the N&amacr;nd&imacr;, should recite it, or that duty should be performed by the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra; another authority permits the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra or any other actor to recite it. The situation is complicated by the rule that at the end of the preliminaries the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra is supposed to leave the stage and the Sth&amacr;paka to come on, while our dramas, as a rule, have the benediction followed by the entry of the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra, or rarely, as in the <hi>P&amacr;rthapar&amacr;krama</hi>, the Sth&amacr;paka. The theory, therefore, suggests that the benediction is recited by the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra or <pb n=344 id=pb344 facs="f:344">Sth&amacr;paka (called S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra by reason of similarity of function and character) behind the curtain, and then he enters on the stage. The matter is not cleared up by the practice followed in the embryo dramas introduced into others: in that included in the <hi>B&amacr;lar&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra recites a benediction of twelve inflected words, and then proceeds with the prologue without a break; in the <hi>J&amacr;nak&imacr;pari&ndotb;aya</hi> it is one of the actors who does so, as in Ravivarman&apos;s <hi>Pradyumn&amacr;bhyudaya</hi>, the director then beginning the play; in the <hi>Caitanyacandrodaya</hi> the benediction is recited behind the curtain, but that is stated to be because the piece to be acted is a Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a or Vy&amacr;yoga, implying that in other cases it normally was recited on the stage, presumably by an actor other than the director.

<p>The extent of the benediction was, as we have seen, disputed.<note n=1 id=n344.1>Lévi, TI. i. 132 f.; ii. 24 f.; Hall, DR., pp. 25 f. The <hi>Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</hi> has six stanzas. R. iii. 137 f. takes Pada as word, giving the <hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi>, <hi>Abhir&amacr;mar&amacr;ghava</hi>, and <hi><corr sic="Anargharagh&amacr;va">Anarghar&amacr;ghava</corr></hi> as examples of 8, 10, and 12 Padas.</note> Bharata&apos;s rule of eight or twelve Padas does not stand alone, for he is credited with mentioning four or sixteen as possible numbers, and Pada may mean inflected word, line, or proposition. Abhinavagupta allows three, six, or twelve Padas in a benediction of three times; four, eight, or sixteen in one of four times; and definitely takes Pada as proposition; illustrations of eight- and twelve-Pada benedictions of this type are given by Abhinavagupta and Bharata. The dramas differ; the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> has one of eight propositions or four lines; the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi> four stanzas; the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi> and the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi> eight lines each; the <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi> twelve words.

<p>Harmony between the benediction and the character of the drama is naturally demanded by the theory, and is observed largely in practice; thus the <hi>Prabodhacandrodaya</hi>, a philosophic drama, begins with an adoration of the sole reality, the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, a drama of political intrigue, with a verse as tortuous as the diplomacy of C&amacr;&ndotb;akya. It is a characteristic of the determination to carry matters to extremes which distinguishes Indian theory that attempts are made to extract from the benediction not merely a general harmony with the theme, but also a reference both to the main characters and to the chief events.<note n=2 id=n344.2>For a general reference see <hi>Pañcar&amacr;tra</hi>, i. 1. In a Jain drama like the <hi>Mohar&amacr;japar&amacr;jaya</hi>, the benediction is addressed to the three T&imacr;rthakaras; in the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi> to the Buddha.</note>



<pb n=345 id=pb345 facs="f:345">
<div2 id=ch13.9 n=9>
<head><ab type=divNum>9.</ab> <hi>The Types of Drama</hi></head>

<p>The types of drama are distinguished by the theorists according to the use which they make of the various dramatic elements enumerated. The highest of the ten main forms, R&umacr;pakas, is the N&amacr;&tdotb;aka or heroic comedy. The term is generic; it may denote any representation whether by pictures or dumb show, but it has also the more important specific sense of the drama proper.

<p>The subject of a N&amacr;&tdotb;aka<note n=1 id=n345.1>N. xviii. 10 ff.; DR. iii. 1&ndash;34; SD. 278, 433, 510; R. iii. 130 ff.</note> should be drawn from tradition, not invented; the hero should be a king, royal sage, or god, who may appear in human form; the dominant sentiment must be the heroic or the erotic, but all may be illustrated, and that of wonder is well suited for the <hi>dénouement</hi>, which should be led up to through the whole series of stages of the action and junctures. The end must be happy; tragedy is forbidden, though the prohibition is unexplained. The prose should be simple without elaborate compounds; the verses clear and sweet; the Pr&amacr;krits should be varied; the whole style noble and harmonious, with full use of all the beauties and the adventitious attractions of the song and the dance as well as music. The number of acts should be from five to ten; if a play contains every kind of episode, it is styled a Mah&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka, if it has ten acts. The rule is generally obeyed, but late dramas styling themselves N&amacr;&tdotb;akas are known of one (Ravid&amacr;sa&apos;s <hi>Mithy&amacr;jñ&amacr;navi&ddotb;ambana</hi>), two (Ved&amacr;ntav&amacr;g&imacr;ça&apos;s <hi>Bhojacarita</hi>), three, or four acts,<note n=2 id=n345.2>Ghanaçy&amacr;ma&apos;s <hi>Navagrahacarita</hi> has three acts; Madhus&umacr;dana&apos;s <hi>J&amacr;nak&imacr;pari&ndotb;aya</hi> (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1705) has four.</note> and one comparatively early work exists in one version of fourteen acts, without any passage in Pr&amacr;krit, the <hi>Mah&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>; the <hi>Adbhut&amacr;r&ndotb;ava</hi> of a Kavibh&umacr;&sdotb;a&ndotb;a has twelve acts. The name of a N&amacr;&tdotb;aka should be derived from the hero or the subject-matter, and this is regularly the case. Four or five is the number of chief personages permitted.

<p>The bourgeois comedy, Prakara&ndotb;a,<note n=3 id=n345.3>N. xviii. 41 ff.; DR. iii. 35&ndash;8; SD. 511 f.; R. iii. 214&ndash;18, who gives <hi>K&amacr;madatta</hi> as the name of a hetaera drama.</note> is a comedy of manners of a rank below royalty, which in the main follows the laws of construction of the N&amacr;&tdotb;aka. The subject-matter is to be framed at his good pleasure by the poet. The hero should be <pb n=346 id=pb346 facs="f:346">a Brahmin, minister, or merchant, who has fallen on evil days and is seeking through difficulties to attain property, love, and the performance of duty, in which he at last succeeds. The heroine may be of three types, a lady of good family, as in the lost <hi>Pu&sdotb;pad&umacr;&sdotb;ita</hi> (<hi>°bh&umacr;&sdotb;ita</hi>); a hetaera as in the lost <hi>Tara&nmacr;gadatta</hi>; or a lady of good family may share the honours with a hetaera, with whom, however, she may not come in contact, as in the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi> and the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>. The drama offers an appropriate place for slaves, Vi&tdotb;as, merchant chiefs, and rogues of various kinds. The erotic sentiment should dominate, though Dhana&mdota;jaya allows also the heroic, and the structure should include all five junctures. The number of acts should be as in the N&amacr;&tdotb;aka, and the name be derived from the hero or heroine or both, as in the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi> and the <hi>Ç&amacr;riputraprakara&ndotb;a</hi> of Açvagho&sdotb;a. It must, however, be noted that the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> has but four acts, and the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, unlike the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi>, does not follow the rule as to name.

<p>The supernatural drama, Samavak&amacr;ra,<note n=1 id=n346.1>N. xviii. 57&ndash;70; xix. 43 f.; DR. iii. 56&ndash;61; SD. 515 f.; R. iii. 249&ndash;64.</note> is described in our sources obviously on the basis of a single play, the <hi>Am&rdotb;tamanthana</hi>, the churning of the ocean to obtain the ambrosia, at which all participants attained their desires. The precise duration of each of its three acts is given, at twelve, four, and two N&amacr;&ddotb;ik&amacr;s (of forty-eight minutes). The subject must be taken from a tale of the gods and demons. The juncture, pause, is omitted, and the expansion (<hi>bindu</hi>) as an element of the plot. The number of heroes may reach twelve, each pursuing an object which he attains. The heroic sentiment dominates. Each act exhibits one type of cheating, tumultuous action, and love. The graceful manner is excluded, or but faintly developed; the U&sdotb;&ndotb;ih, Ku&tdotb;ila, and Anu&sdotb;&tdotb;ubh metres are appropriate. The description fits but loosely Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s <hi>Pañcar&amacr;tra</hi>, the only old drama to which that name may plausibly be applied.

<p>The &Imacr;h&amacr;m&rdotb;ga,<note n=2 id=n346.2>N. xviii. 72&ndash;6; xix. 44 f.; DR. iii. 66&ndash;8; SD. 518; R. iii. 284&ndash;8 (type <hi>M&amacr;y&amacr;kura&nmacr;gik&amacr;</hi>).</note> of which no old example is known, owes its name, according to the <hi>Daçar&umacr;p&amacr;valoka</hi> to the fact that in it a maiden as hard to attain as a gazelle (<hi>m&rdotb;ga</hi>) is sought after (<hi>&imacr;h&amacr;</hi>). The subject is one partly derived from legend and partly <pb n=347 id=pb347 facs="f:347">the poet&apos;s imagination; in special, if the legend relates the death of a great man, this result must be avoided. The essence of the drama is that some one seeks to deprive the hero, who on one view may be divine or human, on another divine only, of a heavenly maiden; the result is a conflict of wills, but actual fighting is to be avoided by artifice. The hero and his rival must both be of the noble and haughty type; the latter must do wrong in error. Only the first two and the last junctures are allowed, and the graceful style is excluded. There are four acts, but Viçvan&amacr;tha mentions a view which allows one act only and makes the hero a god, or six rivals for a divine maiden&apos;s hand.

<p>The &Ddotb;ima<note n=1 id=n347.1>N. xviii. 78&ndash;82; xix. 43 f.; DR. iii. 51&ndash;3; SD. 517; R. iii. 280&ndash;4 (type <hi>V&imacr;rabhadravij&rdotb;mbha&ndotb;a</hi>).</note> is also little known, though the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> cites a <hi>Tripurad&amacr;ha</hi> as a specimen. Its subject is to be legendary; there is to be no pause juncture. The heroes are sixteen gods, demi-gods, and demons, all of the haughty type; magic, sorcery, combats, eclipses of the sun and moon are in place. The erotic and comic sentiments are excluded, that of fury is predominant. There are four acts without introductory scenes of any kind, but the late <hi>Manmathonmathana</hi> of R&amacr;ma has them. The graceful manner is forbidden. It is clear that the type is described on the basis of inadequate material; it may represent a popular form of entertainment which did not attain full recognition. The origin of the name is unknown, for no root <hi>&ddotb;im</hi>, to wound, is found in the language, though Dhanika asserts its existence.

<p>The Vy&amacr;yoga<note n=2 id=n347.2>N. xviii. 83&ndash;5; xix. 44 f.; DR. iii. 54 f.; SD. 514; R. iii. 229&ndash;32 (type <hi>Dhana&mdota;jayajaya</hi>).</note> is, as its name suggests, a military spectacle. Its subject must be legendary, its hero a god or royal sage, but Dhana&mdota;jaya allows a man. It is in one act, the action not extending over a day, and it is filled with strife and battle, the intervention of women as the cause of battle being excluded. The first two and last junctures alone are permitted, the erotic and comic sentiments are barred, and the graceful manner. The type is old, for it is found in Bh&amacr;sa and revives later.

<p>The Act or Isolated Act (A&nmacr;ka, <corr sic="Ut&sdotb;&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;ik&amacr;&nmacr;ka">Uts&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;ik&amacr;&nmacr;ka</corr>)<note n=3 id=n347.3>N. xviii. 86&ndash;9; xix. 45 f.; DR. iii. 64 f.; SD. 519<corr>;</corr> R. iii. 224&ndash;8 (type <hi>Karu&ndotb;&amacr;kandala</hi>) who differs.</note> is a single-act piece, whose longer style serves to discriminate it from an act of <pb n=348 id=pb348 facs="f:348">a normal drama. Its subject is taken from legend, but may be developed by the poet; the first and last junctures alone are permitted. The hero should be human, of the common folk, according to the later theory. The sentiment should be the pathetic, and the style the verbal. The laments of women should accompany the description of battles and fights, but these should not take place on the stage. Viçvan&amacr;tha gives the <hi>Çarmi&sdotb;&tdotb;h&amacr;yay&amacr;ti</hi> as an example, but the type is not represented by any early play.

<p>The farce, Prahasana,<note n=1 id=n348.1>N. xviii. 93&ndash;8; xix. 45 f.; DR. iii. 49 f.; SD. 534&ndash;8; R. iii. 268&ndash;79 (type <hi>&Amacr;nandakoça</hi>).</note> on the other hand, has every sign of popular origin and vogue. The subject is the poet&apos;s invention; it deals essentially with the tricks and quarrels of low characters of every kind. There is but one act, and only the first and last junctures; the comic sentiment predominates. The <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi> recognizes three kinds; the pure is that in which heretics, Brahmins, men- and maid-servants and parasites are represented in appropriate costume and language; the modified represents eunuchs, chamberlains, and ascetics in the garb, and with the speech, of lovers; and the mixed is styled so because it contains the elements of the V&imacr;th&imacr;, and is filled with rogues. Only the first and last are recognized by the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, the second being included in the third, while Viçvan&amacr;tha recognizes the possibility of there being only one hero or several, and allows the use of two acts in such a case, as in the <hi>La&tdotb;akamelaka</hi>. The graceful and violent manners are excluded.

<p>The monologue, Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a,<note n=2 id=n348.2>N. xviii. 99&ndash;101; xix. 45 f.; DR. iii. 44&ndash;6; SD. 513; R. iii. 232&ndash;5<corr>.</corr></note> has also an obviously popular character and origin. The subject-matter is invented by the poet; a parasite sets forth his own or another&apos;s adventures, appealing to both the heroic and the erotic sentiments by descriptions of heroism and beauty in the verbal manner. There are only the first and last junctures, and but one act. The actor speaks in the air, repeating answers supposed to be received. The elements of the L&amacr;sya are specially in place, a fact which shows that we have here a formal version of a primitive mimetic performance. Viçvan&amacr;tha gives as example the <hi>L&imacr;l&amacr;madhukara</hi>; the <hi>Ç&amacr;rad&amacr;tilaka</hi> is one of the best known.

<pb n=349 id=pb349 facs="f:349"><p>The garland, V&imacr;th&imacr;,<note n=1 id=n349.1>N. xviii. 102 f.; xix. 45 f.; DR. iii. 62 f.; SD. 520. Konow (ID. p. 32) is in error as to N. R. iii. 265&ndash;70 has <hi>M&amacr;dhav&imacr;-V&imacr;thik&amacr;</hi>.</note> has a certain similarity to the Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a in that it includes frequent speeches in the air, and is in one act. But it is played by one or two actors, or, according to Viçvan&amacr;tha on one view found in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, by three, one of each station in rank. The leading sentiment is the erotic, but others are hinted at. The graceful manner is forbidden by the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, but enjoined by the other authorities, and the elements of the garland are available. Only the first and last junctures are employed, but all the elements of the plot are present. The theorists are sadly at a loss to explain the name garland; it is suggested that the several sentiments are gathered into it as into a garland, or the meaning &lsquo;way&rsquo; or &lsquo;road&rsquo; is accepted in lieu. The only example given by Viçvan&amacr;tha is the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;</hi>, which is not the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi>; the first act of the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi> is styled Bakulav&imacr;th&imacr;, but is in no sense even taken by itself an example of this type.

<p>The later theory as seen in Viçvan&amacr;tha<note n=2 id=n349.2>SD. 276.</note> adds descriptions of eighteen minor forms of drama, Upar&umacr;pakas, which represent refinements on the original scheme. Needless to say, though omitted in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, quotations are found ascribing to Bharata the doctrine, though he mentions in them but fifteen with several variations of name;<note n=3 id=n349.3>Hall, DR., p. 6.</note> the <hi>Agni Pur&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi><note n=4 id=n349.4>cccxxxvii. 2&ndash;4. R. iii. 218&ndash;23 denies the separate character of the N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr; or Prakara&ndotb;ik&amacr;.</note> mentions eighteen with some variants of name, while a verse cited by Dhanika<note n=5 id=n349.5>DR. i. 8.</note> names seven forms of mimetic dramas, which it classes in conjunction with the Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a. The age of these divisions is, therefore, uncertain; the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi> condescends to mention only the N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;, but obviously knows of the existence of others, confining its scope to the main forms, as its title indicates.

<p>The <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi><note n=6 id=n349.6>xviii. 54&ndash;6; DR. iii. 39&ndash;43; SD. 539.</note> mentions, in a passage suspected of interpolation, but without special cause, a type of dramas N&amacr;&tdotb;&imacr;, which later is styled N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;, or lesser heroic comedy. The subject-matter in this view may be either legendary or invented; the later opinion requires it to be invented as in the Prakara&ndotb;a, which is the model for the N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr; in this regard. The hero is to be <pb n=350 id=pb350 facs="f:350">that of the N&amacr;&tdotb;aka, a gay king, and the intrigue consists of his efforts to attain marriage with the heroine, who is an <hi>ingénue</hi> of royal family, whom he is destined to marry, but who by some accident or design has been introduced into the harem in an inferior capacity. The lovers have to strive against the jealousy of the queen, a lady of mature character and devotion to the king, who at last is induced to sanction the nuptials. The life of the court gives opportunity for introducing music, song, and the dance as elements in the entertainment. The graceful manner is appropriate, and the erotic sentiment is prescribed; by an excess of zeal, when the drama as usual has four acts, they are in theory to contain each one of the four members of the graceful style. A lesser number of acts is allowed by Dhana&mdota;jaya. There is certainly not much difference between such a N&amacr;&tdotb;aka as the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi> and the normal N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;, save the length, as expressed in the number of the acts, but it would be unwise to assert that the distinction is based on this alone. It is a fact that both in the <hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi> and the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi> the poet has freely enough invented his episodes, and this is a fact justifying the discrimination.

<p>The little bourgeois comedy, the Prakara&ndotb;ik&amacr;,<note n=1 id=n350.1>SD. 554.</note> is precisely of the same character as the N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;, save that its hero and heroine are of the merchant class. It is clear that it is due merely to a false desire for symmetry, as it is merely a Prakara&ndotb;a when judged by the three determinants of plot, character, and sentiment, and Dhanika rightly rejects it as a species, though Viçvan&amacr;tha admits it.

<p>A variant of the N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr; is the Sa&tdotb;&tdotb;aka,<note n=2 id=n350.2>SD. 542. Cf. the Bharhut bas-relief of a dance, <hi>S&amacr;&ddotb;ika</hi>; Hultzsch, ZDMG. xl. 66, no. 50.</note> which differs from it merely by being all in Pr&amacr;krit, in having no introductory scenes of any kind, and in having the acts called Javanik&amacr;ntara. As the name denotes a form of dance, it is quite possible that it owes its origin as a species to the use of such dances in these plays. We have an example in R&amacr;jaçekhara&apos;s <hi>Karp&umacr;ramañjar&imacr;</hi>.

<p>The Tro&tdotb;aka<note n=3 id=n350.3>SD. 540<corr>.</corr></note> or To&tdotb;aka is merely a variant of the N&amacr;&tdotb;aka; the Beng&amacr;l&imacr; recension of the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi> which contains Apabhra&ndota;ça verses and an appropriate dance of the distracted <pb n=351 id=pb351 facs="f:351">king alone gives the name. The term denotes both a dance and confused speech, and the origin of the species need be sought only in this peculiarity. The other manuscripts call it a N&amacr;&tdotb;aka.

<p>The other species enumerated have no representatives in the old literature, nor is this wonderful, for they show the character rather of pantomime with song, dance, and music than of serious drama; the Go&sdotb;&tdotb;h&imacr;<note n=1 id=n351.1>SD. 541. Cf. Hall, DR., p. 6.</note> has nine or ten men and five or six women as actors; the Hall&imacr;ça<note n=2 id=n351.2>SD. 555.</note> is clearly a glorified dance; the N&amacr;&tdotb;yar&amacr;saka<note n=3 id=n351.3>SD. 543.</note> a ballet and pantomime; the Prasth&amacr;na,<note n=4 id=n351.4>SD. 544.</note> in which hero and heroine are slaves, is based on a mimetic dance; so also apparently are the Bh&amacr;&ndotb;ik&amacr;,<note n=5 id=n351.5>SD. 556; for the others see 546 ff. Names of plays are given, but they are lost, and were probably late.</note> or little Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a, and the K&amacr;vya, both one-act pieces; the R&amacr;saka, of the same general type, includes dialect in its language. The Ull&amacr;pya may have one or three acts, and its hero is of high rank, while battles form part of its subject, as they do also in the Sa&mdota;l&amacr;paka, which may have one, three, or four acts. The Durmallik&amacr; has four acts, a hero of low rank, and a precise time-table of duration of acts. The Vil&amacr;sik&amacr; has one act, but is interesting in that the hero has, to support him, not only the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, but also the parasite and a friend (<hi>p&imacr;&tdotb;hamarda</hi>); the sentiment is erotic. The Çilpaka is mysterious, for it has four acts, allows all the manners, has a Brahmin as hero with a man of lower rank as secondary hero, excludes the calm and comic sentiments, and has twenty-seven most miscellaneous constituents; if a pantomime, it was clearly not amusing. The Pre&nmacr;kha&ndotb;a, or Prek&sdotb;a&ndotb;a, is a piece in one act, with a hero of low birth, full of combats and hard words; it has no introductory scenes, and both the benediction and the Prarocan&amacr; are performed behind the scenes, but none of the late works which bear approximately this title conforms to type. The Çr&imacr;gadita is in a single act, the story legendary, the hero and heroine of high rank, the manner verbal; the word Çr&imacr; is often mentioned, or the goddess is presented seated and singing some verse. The only play known of that name is the <hi>Subhadr&amacr;hara&ndotb;a</hi> of M&amacr;dhava before <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1600, which is much like an ordinary play, but contains a narrative verse, suggesting connexion with the shadow-drama. It is characteristic that the theory ignores wholly this type.



<pb n=352 id=pb352 facs="f:352">
<div2 id=ch13.10 n=10>
<head><ab type=divNum>10.</ab> <hi>The Influence of Theory on Practice</hi></head>

<p>Though we cannot say precisely at what date the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> obtained definite form, we can be assured that by the time of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa it was not merely known, but its authority was already accepted as binding on poets. The mere fact that K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s dramas exhibit a marvellous fidelity to the rules of the Ç&amacr;stra might be explained by the theory that it drew its principles from them rather than <hi>vice versa</hi>. But in his epics K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, in due accord with the duty of a poet to display every form of his erudition, has emphatically shown a far-reaching competence in the terminology of the Ç&amacr;stra. In the <hi>Kum&amacr;rasambhava</hi><note n=1 id=n352.1>vii. 90 f.; xi. 36.</note> Çiva and P&amacr;rvat&imacr; watched the performance in honour of their nuptials of a N&amacr;&tdotb;aka in which the different dramatic manners were combined with the junctures, the modes of the music corresponded with the sentiments, and the Apsarases displayed their grace of form. There are similar references in the <hi>Raghuva&ndota;ça</hi>.<note n=2 id=n352.2>ii. 18.</note> The knowledge of the Ç&amacr;stra by later writers goes without saying. The author of the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi><note n=3 id=n352.3>iv. 3.</note> depicts R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa as comparing political combinations with the work of a dramatist and giving a brief plan of the structure of the drama, and Bhavabh&umacr;ti<note n=4 id=n352.4><hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>, p. 79.</note> and Mur&amacr;ri<note n=5 id=n352.5>vi. 48, and see pp. 108 f.; Lévi, TI. ii. 38.</note> alike show familiarity with the terminology of the Ç&amacr;stra as well as with its rules. The most complete proof, however, of the domination of the theory is the absence of any original creations in dramatic form. There must, it is certain, have been a time when the genius of Indian poetry was active in trying and developing the new instrument of drama, but with the appearance of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> this creative epoch came to all intents and purposes to a close, and the writers of the classical drama accept without question the forms imposed upon them by authority, although that authority rests on no logical or psychological basis, but represents merely generalizations, often hasty, from a limited number of plays.

<p>The N&amacr;&tdotb;aka, accordingly, remains the form of drama <hi>par excellence</hi>, a pre-eminence due to its comparative freedom from narrow <pb n=353 id=pb353 facs="f:353">restrictions as well as to the submissive spirit of the dramatists. The form serves very different purposes; it accommodates itself not only to the grace and charm of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, but to the unmeasured and irregular genius of Bhavabh&umacr;ti; it permits of the political drama of Viç&amacr;khadatta, as well as the philosophical disquisitions of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;amiçra and the devotional fervour of Kavikar&ndotb;ap&umacr;ra&apos;s <hi>Caitanyacandrodaya</hi>.

<p>The Prakara&ndotb;a is essentially similar to the N&amacr;&tdotb;aka save in the social status of the hero and heroine; the distinction between the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi> and a N&amacr;&tdotb;aka is far less important than the similarity. The <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, indeed, departs from type, but that is not surprising now that it is known that it is based on Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi>, which is not merely the work of a man of unusual talent, but came into being before the rules of the drama had attained the binding force they later achieved. The N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;, however, which is likewise closely allied to the N&amacr;&tdotb;aka, became stereotyped at an early stage, leaving no room for serious innovation; the charms of the song and dance appear to have prevailed, and to have dissuaded efforts at originality of plot. The Vy&amacr;yoga is hardly more than an aspect of the N&amacr;&tdotb;aka; the spirit of such works as those of Bh&amacr;sa in this genre is reflected in many passages of the <hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi> and the <hi>Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</hi>.

<p>The farce and the monologue, of which we have many specimens in the later drama, are confined to representations of the lower and coarser side of life, but curiously enough they fail entirely to achieve what might have seemed the legitimate aim of a vivid portrayal of the lives and manners of contemporary society; tradition has proved too strong for the dramatists whose works deal with types, not individuals. On the other hand, we find practically no living tradition of the construction of dramas of the other five classes of the theory, &Ddotb;ima, Samavak&amacr;ra, &Imacr;h&amacr;m&rdotb;ga, V&imacr;th&imacr;, and Uts&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;ik&amacr;&nmacr;ka. We may legitimately assume that these were types erected on little foundation of fact, and that, while the theory could restrict enterprise, it could not induce life in forms which had no real vitality of their own. The mere fact that later poets occasionally patronize these forms is sufficient evidence of the strength of the authority of the Ç&amacr;stra. It is amazing, however, that we find no serious effort to produce <pb n=354 id=pb354 facs="f:354">pure comedy; the farce and the monologue may hover on the borders of that form; they certainly never attain it.

<p>To the force of the tradition is presumably to be ascribed the absence of any effort at tragedy, though its absence undoubtedly coincides with the mental outlook of the Indian people and their philosophy of life. Bh&amacr;sa has indeed been claimed as a tragedian, but with complete disregard for the facts; there is in fact in his dramas disregard of the rule which objects to death on the stage, but the slain are always evil men, whose death is just punishment; the <hi>&Umacr;rubha&nmacr;ga</hi> may to us be tragic, but that is because we are not adorers of Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u who regard with relish the fate of the enemy of that god, the evil Duryodhana. The tragic sentiment is nowhere recognized, for the term (<hi>raudra</hi>), which is unhappily often so rendered, is the sentiment which is based on anger, and has nothing truly tragic in it. The idea is, indeed, entirely wanting in the theory as it is in the practice.

<p>To the developed thought of India, as it existed during the vogue of the drama, there was little possibility of a realization of the elements of which Greek tragedy is composed. The conception of human activity striving with circumstance, endeavouring to assert itself in the teeth of forces superhuman in power and uncontrollable, and meeting with utter ruin, but yet maintaining its honour, which affords the spring of tragedy in Greece, is alien to Indian thought. Fate is nothing outside man; he is subject to no alien influences; he is what he has made himself by acts in past lives; if he suffers evil he has deserved it as just retribution, and to sympathize with him, to feel the pathos of his plight, is really unthinkable. Death, therefore, by violence is merely a just punishment of crime, and it is a more refined taste than that of Bh&amacr;sa which bids us banish from the stage the spectacle of what is no more than an execution, a scene as ill-suited to the decorum and good taste of the serious drama<note n=1 id=n354.1>Cf. the later view in Rome, which forbids death on the stage, Horace, <hi lang=la>Ars Poetica</hi>, 183 ff., with Aristotle, <hi>Poetics</hi>, 1452 <hi>b</hi> 10 ff., which approves the presentation of death and other acts on the stage.</note> as to the rude merriment of the farce or monologue.



<pb n=355 id=pb355 facs="f:355">
<div2 id=ch13.11 n=11>
<head><ab type=divNum>11.</ab> <hi>Aristotle and the Indian Theory of Poetics</hi></head>

<p>It is natural that contemporaneously with the effort to prove the Greek origin of the Indian drama efforts<note n=1 id=n355.1>M. Lindenau, <hi>Festschrift Windisch</hi>, pp. 38 ff.</note> should have been made to establish the indebtedness of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> to Aristotle&apos;s theory of drama.<note n=2 id=n355.2><hi>Poetics</hi>, 1449 <hi>b</hi> <hi>sq.</hi> with Butcher&apos;s trs. and Bywater&apos;s notes.</note> There is no doubt of the many parallels between the two theories. The unity of action is fully recognized in the Ç&amacr;stra, and the rule which insists that the events described in an Act shall not exceed in duration a day has a certain similarity to the unity of time in Aristotle,<note n=3 id=n355.3><hi>Poetics</hi>, 1449 <hi>b</hi> 13. For time analysis in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, see Jackson, JAOS. xx. 341&ndash;59; in Har&sdotb;a, xxi. 88&ndash;108.</note> and is much more significant than such agreement as there is as to unity of place. The doctrine that the drama is an imitation (<hi>anuk&rdotb;ti</hi>) does not differ from the doctrine of Mimesis, but there is an essential distinction in what is imitated or represented; in the Ç&amacr;stra it is a state or condition, in Aristotle it is action, a distinction absolutely in accord with the different geniuses of the two peoples. The importance of acting is common in both schemes, but Aristotle makes little of the dance. Both stress the plot, which the Ç&amacr;stra recognizes as the body of the drama. The Indian division of characters as high, middle, and low has a certain parallelism to the Aristotelian distinctions of modes of depicting character as ideal, real, and inferior. The Ç&amacr;stra, like Aristotle, shows appreciation of the distinction between male and female characters. To some degree we find in the Ç&amacr;stra the recognition of the necessity of conflict in drama, and of the emotions of pity and fear in the sentiment of pathos and in the element of the development known as Vidrava. The Ç&amacr;stra also touches on the relation of the feelings aroused in the actor and in the audience as in the <hi>Poetics</hi>. Both recognize the use of significant names, and deal with the linguistic aspects of style.

<p>Other suggestions of Greek influence may also be adduced; thus we have the mention of what seems a derivative of the Greek caryatides in the description of the theatre; the monologue may be based on the Greek Mime, and we have the actual <pb n=356 id=pb356 facs="f:356">mention in a passage of the Ç&amacr;stra of Yavanas, while the description of the Vi&tdotb;a suggests derivation from the Greek parasite. But it is impossible to take these pieces of evidence as conclusive proof of borrowing; we are, in fact, faced with the usual difficulty that, if there were borrowing, the Indian genius has known how to recast so cleverly and to adapt what it borrowed so effectively that the traces which would definitely establish indebtedness cannot be found. In all the instances enumerated there is no doubt similarity, but there is also essential difference such as renders independent development of the Indian doctrine at least as probable as borrowing.









<pb n=357 id=pb357 facs="f:357">
<div0 id=pt4 n=IV>
<head type=label>IV</head>

<head>DRAMATIC PRACTICE</head>


<pb n=358 id=pb358 facs="f:358">
<div1 id=ch14 n=XIV>
<head type=label>XIV</head>

<head>THE INDIAN THEATRE</head>


<div2 id=ch14.1 n=1>
<head><ab type=divNum>1.</ab> <hi>The Theatre</hi></head>

<p>The Sanskrit drama of the theorists is, despite its complexity, essentially intended for performance, nor is there the slightest doubt that the early dramatists were anything but composers of plays meant only to be read. They were connoisseurs, we may be certain, in the merits which would accrue to their works from the accessories of the dance, music, song, and the attractions of acting; the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi> must, for instance, have had much of the attraction of an opera, and as a mere literary work loses seriously in attraction.

<p>On the other hand, the existence of regular theatres for the exhibition of drama is not assumed in the theorists. A drama was, it is clear, normally performed on an occasion of special rejoicing and solemnity, such as a festival of a god, or a royal marriage, or the celebration of a victory, and the place of performance thus naturally came to be the temple of the god or the palace of the king. We learn often in the drama and tales of the existence of dancing halls and music rooms in the royal palace where the ladies of the harem were taught these pleasing arts, and one of these could easily be adapted for a dramatic performance. But we have from the second century B.C. the remains of a cave which seems to have been used, if not for the performance of plays, at any rate for purposes of recitation of poems or some similar end; it is found in the R&amacr;mgarh hill<note n=1 id=n358.1>Bloch, <hi>Arch. Survey of India Report</hi>, 1903&ndash;4, pp. 123 ff.</note> in Chota Nagpur, and, although it is quite impossible to prove that it had anything to do with plays, it is interesting to note that the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> states that the play-house should have the form of a mountain cave and two stories.

<pb n=359 id=pb359 facs="f:359"><p>According to the Ç&amacr;stra,<note n=1 id=n359.1>ii; cf. JPASB. v. 353 ff.; <hi>Çilparatna</hi> (ed. TSS.), pp. 201 ff. Cf. <hi>K&amacr;vyam&imacr;m&amacr;&ndota;s&amacr;</hi>, p. 54.</note> the play-house as made ready for performance may be of three types, the first for the gods, 108 hands (18 inches) long; the second rectangular, 64 hands long and 32 broad; the third triangular, 32 hands long, the second being praised on acoustic grounds. The house falls into two parts, the places for the audience and the stage. The auditorium is marked off by pillars, in front a white pillar for the seats for the Brahmins, then a red pillar for the K&sdotb;atriyas, in the north-west a yellow pillar marks the seats for the Vaiçyas, while the Ç&umacr;dras have a blue-black pillar in the north-east. The seats are of wood and bricks, and arranged in rows. In front beside the stage is a veranda with four pillars, apparently also for the use of spectators. In front of the spectators is the stage (<hi>ra&nmacr;ga</hi>), adorned with pictures and reliefs; it is eight hands square in the second form of play-house; its end is the head of the stage (<hi>ra&nmacr;gaç&imacr;r&sdotb;a</hi>), decorated by figures, and there offerings are made.<note n=2 id=n359.2>For the Greek theatre, which presents certain points of similarity but many of difference, see Dorpfeld, <hi lang=de>Das griechische Theater</hi>; Haigh, <hi>Attic Theatre</hi> (3rd ed.); a brief summary is given in Norwood, <hi>Greek Tragedy</hi>, pp. 49 ff.</note>

<p>Behind<note n=3 id=n359.3>The theory of a transverse curtain (Wilson, I. lxviii) is not supported by evidence of any clear kind. Cf. p. 113, n. 1.</note> the stage is the painted curtain (<hi>pa&tdotb;&imacr;</hi>, <hi>apa&tdotb;&imacr;</hi>, <hi>tiraskara&ndotb;&imacr;</hi>, <hi>pratis&imacr;r&amacr;</hi>), to which the name Yavanik&amacr; (Pr&amacr;krit, Javanik&amacr;) is given, denoting merely that the material is foreign, and forbidding any conclusion as to the Greek origin of the curtain itself or the theatre. When one enters hastily, the curtain is violently thrown aside (<hi>apa&tdotb;&imacr;k&sdotb;epa</hi>). Behind the curtain are the actors&apos; quarters (<hi lang=sa-Latn>nepathyag&rdotb;ha</hi>) or tiring rooms. Here are performed the sounds necessary to represent uproar and confusion which cannot be represented on the stage; here also are uttered the voices of gods and other persons whose presence on the stage is impossible or undesirable.

<p>The colour of the curtain is given in some authorities as necessarily in harmony with the dominant sentiment of the play, in accordance with the classification of sentiments already given, but others permit the use of red in every instance. Normally the entry of any character is effected by the drawing aside of the curtain by two maidens, whose beauty marks them out for this <pb n=360 id=pb360 facs="f:360">employment (<hi>dh&rdotb;tir yavanik&amacr;y&amacr;&hdotb;</hi>). The term Nepathya has suggested an erroneous deduction as to the relative elevation of the stage and the foyer, for it is conceivable that it denotes a descending (<hi>ni-patha</hi>) way, and it has been concluded<note n=1 id=n360.1>Weber, IS. xiv. 225. Cf. Lévi, TI. i. 374; ii. 62.</note> that it was, therefore, below the level of the stage. But the regular phrase of the entry of an actor on the stage (<hi>ra&nmacr;g&amacr;vatara&ndotb;a</hi>) would suggest exactly the opposite, a descent from the foyer to the stage. In the case of stages hastily put together, often for merely very temporary aims, it would clearly be absurd to expect any fixed practice, nor can we say what was the normal height of the stage platform. In the case of a play within a play, in the <hi>B&amacr;lar&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> of R&amacr;jaçekhara, we find that both a stage and a tiring room are erected on the original stage, though we may assume that these were of a very simple structure.

<p>The number of doors leading to the tiring room from the stage is regularly given as two,<note n=2 id=n360.2>The Greek number was three, later five. The Chinese stage, which resembles the Indian in its primitive character, but has no curtain, has two doors, one for entry, one for exit; Ridgeway, <hi>Dramas</hi>, &amp;c., pp. 274 f.</note> and apparently the place of the orchestra was between them.


<div2 id=ch14.2 n=2>
<head><ab type=divNum>2.</ab> <hi>The Actors</hi></head>

<p>The normal term for actor is Na&tdotb;a, a term which has the wider sense of dancer or acrobat; terms like Bharata, or Bh&amacr;rata, C&amacr;ra&ndotb;a,<note n=3 id=n360.3>W. Crooke, <hi>The Tribes and Castes of the N. W. Provinces and Oudh</hi>, ii. 20 ff.</note> Kuç&imacr;lava, Çail&umacr;&sdotb;a, or Çaubhika have interest practically only for the history of the drama. The chief actor, whose name S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra doubtless denotes him as primarily the architect of the theatre, the man who secures the erection of the temporary stage, is occasionally styled &lsquo;troop-head of actors (<hi>na&tdotb;ag&amacr;ma&ndotb;i</hi>)&rsquo;,<note n=4 id=n360.4>Hillebrandt, AID., p. 12; cf. <hi>na&tdotb;agr&amacr;ma</hi>, <hi>Epigr. Ind.</hi> i. 381.</note> and he is essentially the instructor of the other actors in their art (<hi>n&amacr;&tdotb;y&amacr;c&amacr;rya</hi>), so that his title S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra can be used topically as equivalent to Professor. For this high position his qualifications were to be numerous; he was supposed to be learned in all the arts and sciences, to be acquainted with the habits and customs of all lands, to combine the completeness of technical knowledge with practical skill, and to be possessed of all the <pb n=361 id=pb361 facs="f:361">moral qualities which an Indian genius can enumerate. To him falls not merely the very important function of introducing the play, but also of taking one of the chief parts; thus he plays Vatsa in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, and in the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi> K&amacr;mandak&imacr;, the nun, who powerfully affects the current of the drama. He is normally the husband of one of the actresses (<hi>na&tdotb;&imacr;</hi>), who aids him in the opening scene, and who is compelled, poor woman, to combine the arduous life of an actress with the domestic duty of looking after her husband&apos;s material wants. She is represented as devoted to him, fasting to secure reunion in another life, preparing his meal and seeking to remove by her good works the dangers which threaten him, and compelled to play her parts, although anxious, as in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, over the difficulty of securing the marriage of her daughter to a fiancé who has gone overseas, or, as in the <hi>J&amacr;nak&imacr;pari&ndotb;aya</hi>, over the wickedness of another actor in seeking to take her daughter from her.

<p>The Sth&amacr;paka, according to the theory, is to resemble in his attributes the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra; as we have seen, to what extent he really in the dramas known to us was employed as distinct from the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra, it is impossible to say; the name suggests that he aided him in the structure of the stage, and then in his actor&apos;s duties. But there is no ground to assume that he really had disappeared as a living figure before the classical drama; the occasional mention of him in actual dramas as well as in the theory need not be artificial. We have, however, a much more common attendant of the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra in the P&amacr;rip&amacr;rçvika, who appears in the prologue of many plays, and in addition acted the parts of persons of middle rank. He receives the orders of his master and passes them on to the other actors, and directs the operations of the chorus, as in the <hi>Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</hi>. He is addressed by his master as M&amacr;r&sdotb;a, and he greets him as Bh&amacr;va.

<p>The other actors, of whom there must often have been many in pieces with crowds introduced, are to have the qualities of the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra in as generous a measure as may be; they are divided, however, according to their qualifications into superior, medium, and third-rate actors.<note n=1 id=n361.1>xxiv. 85 f.</note> The principal parts in any drama are, however, few; the king, the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, the parasite, the heroine, and a companion are stock types. The division of <pb n=362 id=pb362 facs="f:362">rôles is seldom shown in the prologues, whence are derived most of the details of our knowledge of actual performances. The S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi> and the <hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi> plays the part of Vatsa, his younger brother that of Yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a in the former play and that of D&rdotb;&ddotb;havarman in the latter; the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra and the P&amacr;rip&amacr;rçvika take in the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi> the rôles of K&amacr;mandak&imacr; and her pupil Avalokit&amacr; respectively. This taking of women&apos;s parts by men is not by any means the normal practice; the Na&tdotb;&imacr; normally plays an important female part;<note n=1 id=n362.1>Cf. <hi>Karp&umacr;ramañjar&imacr;</hi>, i. 12/13.</note> in the embryo drama in the <hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi> we find that the heroine&apos;s part is played by &Amacr;ra&ndotb;yik&amacr;, and the hero&apos;s part was to have been performed by another girl Manoram&amacr;, but Vatsa, without the queen&apos;s knowledge, insinuated himself into the scene <hi lang=la>in propria persona</hi>. In the legend of Bharata&apos;s exhibition of the <hi>Lak&sdotb;m&imacr;svaya&mdota;vara</hi> the nymph Urvaç&imacr; is represented as playing the chief rôle, and in D&amacr;modaragupta&apos;s <hi>Ku&tdotb;&tdotb;an&imacr;mata</hi>, where an actual representation of the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi> is described, we find a woman in the rôle of the princess. The <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi><note n=2 id=n362.2>xxvi.; cf. xii. 166 f.</note> expressly admits of three modes of representation; the rôles may be filled by persons of appropriate sex and age; the rôles of the old may be taken by the young and <hi>vice versa</hi>; and the rôles of men may be played by women and <hi>vice versa</hi>. The taking of women&apos;s parts by men has, curiously enough, a very early piece of evidence, for the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi> mentions the word Bhr&umacr;ku&ndota;sa, which was used to denote a man who made up as a female.<note n=3 id=n362.3>Weber, IS. xiii. 493.</note>

<p>We are, it is clear, to conceive of the troupe of actors under the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra as ready to wander hither and thither in search of a favourable opportunity of exhibiting their powers as interpreters. The performance of a drama became, it is clear, in later times at any rate, a worthy adornment of a festive occasion such as a religious festival, the consecration of a king, a marriage, the taking possession of a town or a new estate, the return of a traveller, and the birth of a son. The best patrons of the actors might be kings, but there was evidently no lack of appreciation of their services among men of lesser rank but of large means. The later prologues give us details of the rivalry between different troupes. In the <hi>Anarghar&amacr;ghava</hi> the actor declares that <pb n=363 id=pb363 facs="f:363">he has come to exhibit a superior sort of drama to that played by a rival, and asserts that the dearest desire of a player is to satisfy the public and to win back the favour he has lost. R&amacr;jaçekhara twice introduces the motive of a competition between actors to win the hand of an actress who has been offered by her father in marriage to the most adept of her suitors. Jayadeva invents a pleasing tale of an actor who won great success and reputation, inducing a comedian of the south to claim his name and steal his renown. The actor in revenge went south, and, striking up a partnership with a singer, won both repute and profit in the courts of the Deccan.

<p>The reputation of actors and actresses was low and unsavoury; they are reputed to live on the price of their wives&apos; honour (<hi>j&amacr;y&amacr;j&imacr;va</hi>, <hi>r&umacr;p&amacr;j&imacr;va</hi>), and Manu imposes only a minor penalty on illicit relations with the wife of an actor on the score of their willingness to hand over their wives to others and profit by their dishonour.<note n=1 id=n363.1>viii. 362; cf. <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, ii. 30. 8; <hi>Ku&tdotb;&tdotb;an&imacr;mata</hi>, 855.</note> The <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi> gives equally clear testimony of the lack of chastity among the actresses or their predecessors.<note n=2 id=n363.2>vi. 1. 13.</note> The law book of Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u<note n=3 id=n363.3>xvi. 8.</note> treats them as &Amacr;yogavas, a mixed caste representing the fruit of alliances, improper and undesirable, between Ç&umacr;dras and the daughters of the Vaiçya; to be an actor or a teacher of the art is ranked as a lesser sin in Baudh&amacr;yana.<note n=4 id=n363.4>ii. 1. 2. 13.</note> The Kuç&imacr;lava is described as a Ç&umacr;dra, who ought to be banished;<note n=5 id=n363.5><hi>Kau&tdotb;il&imacr;ya</hi>, p. 7.</note> his evidence, and indeed that of any actor, is not to be accepted in law,<note n=6 id=n363.6>Manu, viii. 65; Y&amacr;jñ. ii. 70<corr>.</corr></note> and Brahmins may not accept food offered by an actor,<note n=7 id=n363.7>Manu, iv. 215; Y&amacr;jñ. i. 161.</note> a fact attested by the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra in the prologue to the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> who can find no one in Ujjayin&imacr; to accept his hospitality. Actors again are classed in Manu with wrestlers and boxers. An actress was often, if not necessarily, one of the great army of courtesans; Vasantasen&amacr;, the hetaera of the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi> and <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, is herself skilled in acting, and has in her household maidens learning to act, and Da&ndotb;&ddotb;in includes lessons in this art in his account of the education of the perfect courtesan in the <hi>Daçakum&amacr;racarita</hi>.

<p>On the other hand, we have traces of a higher side of the <pb n=364 id=pb364 facs="f:364">profession, which doubtless can quite fairly be connected with the gradual elevation of the drama from humble origins to the rank of an elaborate and refined poetry. Bharata, the alleged founder of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, ranks as a Muni, or holy sage, and Urvaç&imacr;, a divine nymph, is treated as an actress. What is more important is that B&amacr;&ndotb;a definitely enumerates in the <hi>Har&sdotb;acarita</hi> among his friends an actor and an actress; Bhart&rdotb;hari<note n=1 id=n364.1>iii. 57.</note> refers to their friendship with kings, which is also attested in the legend of Vasumitra, son of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa&apos;s hero Agnimitra, who was slain amidst his actors by his enemy. K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa himself represents Agnivar&ndotb;a, king of Raghu&apos;s line, as pleased to compete with actors in their own speciality. Vatsa, in the <hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi>, is prepared to play a part without question, and Bhavabh&umacr;ti in two of his prefaces asserts his friendship with his actors. In truth, men who could effectively declaim the stanzas of Bhavabh&umacr;ti must have possessed both education and culture in a high degree, and have been very different from the acrobats and jugglers, dancers, and others whose humble occupations account for the censures of the law books and the <hi>Arthaç&amacr;stra</hi>.


<div2 id=ch14.3 n=3>
<head><ab type=divNum>3.</ab> <hi>The Mise-en-scène and Representation of the Drama</hi></head>

<p>We have no trace in the drama of any attempt to introduce scenery into the representation. The curtain remained as a background throughout the entertainment, and it was in the main left to the imagination of the spectator, aided by the descriptions of the poet, to conceive the beauties of the situation supposed to be presented to his eyes. We have for this conclusive proof, if any were needed beyond the silence of the text-books, in the abundant stage directions which accompany the text of our dramas, and are found even in the fragments of Açvagho&sdotb;a. When actions such as watering a plant were ascribed to an actress, no serious effort was made to bring in plants and perform the ceremonial of watering; on the contrary, she went through a mimicry of the process, which was enough to satisfy the audience. The king may mount a chariot, but no effort is made to bring one for this purpose; he merely goes in <pb n=365 id=pb365 facs="f:365">elaborate pantomime through the action of getting up off the ground, and the audience, trained and intelligent, realizes what has happened. At the beginning of the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi> the gazelle which Du&hdotb;&sdotb;anta follows is not a real animal, but the S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra tells us that the king is pursuing a gazelle, and the actor, who represents the monarch, by his eager gaze and his gestures reveals himself as in the act of seeking to shoot the deer. To pluck flowers is merely to imitate the movements of one who really does so, and an actress with any skill has no difficulty in persuading an audience by her marks of agitation that she is escaping from the attacks of a bee.

<p>There is thus no tedious attempt at realism, though the dramatists vary in the care with which they avoid the absurd in their use of conventions; the works of Bh&amacr;sa show doubtless an excessive tendency to allow of strain being placed on the credulity of the audience. The exits and entrances of the characters are often abrupt and unnatural, but the drama was not primarily intended as a realistic copy of events, and doubtless was not felt unsatisfactory by the audience. Nor, it may be remembered, has perfection in detail in any form of ceremonial ever made a strong appeal to Indian minds; in the most gorgeous celebrations there will occur, without exciting surprise or comment, strange deviations from western canons of good taste and elegance.

<p>To a limited extent, however, use was made of minor properties, which are classed under the generic style of model work (<hi>pusta</hi>).<note n=1 id=n365.1>N. xxi. 5 ff. Masks may have been used for animals, but not normally as in Greece; cf. ZDMG. lxxiv. 137, n. 2.</note> The <hi><corr sic="N&amacr;tyaç&amacr;stra">N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</corr></hi> distinguishes three forms of such objects; they may be made up (<hi>sandhima</hi>) from bamboos covered with skins or cloths; or mechanical means might be employed (<hi>vy&amacr;jima</hi>); or merely clothes (<hi>ve&sdotb;&tdotb;ita</hi>) used. We hear of the making of an elephant in the <hi>Udayanacarita</hi>; the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> owes its name to the toy cart which appears in it; the <hi>B&amacr;lar&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi> has mechanical dolls, and doubtless there were represented houses, caves, chariots, rocks, horses, and so on; monsters with animal heads and many arms could be made of clay and bamboos, and covered with cloths; we are expressly told that weapons must not be made of hard material, but that <pb n=366 id=pb366 facs="f:366">stocks of grass, bamboos, and lac may be made to serve, and naturally gestures served in lieu of hard blows.

<p>The dress<note n=1 id=n366.1>N. xxi.</note> of the actors is carefully regulated, especially as regards colour, which evidently was regarded as an important item in matters of sentiment. Ascetics wear garments of rags or bark; those in charge in the harem red jackets, kings gay garments or, if there are portents described, garments without colour. &Amacr;bh&imacr;ra maidens wear dark blue clothes; in other cases dirty or uncoloured garments are prescribed. Dirty clothes indicate madness, distraction, misery, or a journey; uncoloured garb, one engaged in worship or some solemn religious service, an interesting survival of antique custom, while gods, D&amacr;navas, Gandharvas, Uragas, Yak&sdotb;as, and Rak&sdotb;ases, as well as lovers and kings, normally wear gay clothing.

<p>Colour,<note n=2 id=n366.2>N. xxi. 62 ff.; Lévi, TI. i. 388; ii. 69. Cf. the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi>, iii. 1. 26; Y&amacr;jñavalkya, iii. 162.</note> however, is by no means confined to garments; the actors are expected to adorn themselves with paint of hues appropriate to the rôles they play. There are, on one theory, four fundamental colours, white, blue-black, red, and yellow, from which others are developed, for instance pigeon colour by mixing the first two; a reddish yellow (<hi>gaura</hi>) from mixing the last two is also recorded. It or dark (<hi>çy&amacr;ma</hi>) is given as suited for kings, while happiness is indicated by it. Kir&amacr;tas, Barbaras, Andhras, Dravi&ddotb;as, the people of K&amacr;çi and Kosala, Pulindas, and the people of the Deccan are to be black (<hi>asita</hi>); the Çakas, Yavanas, Pahlavas, and B&amacr;lhikas<note n=3 id=n366.3>Also read P&amacr;hravas and B&amacr;hlikas. Cf. <hi>K&amacr;vyam&imacr;m&amacr;&ndota;s&amacr;</hi>, pp. 96 f.</note> are to be reddish yellow; P&amacr;ñc&amacr;las, Ç&umacr;rasenas, M&amacr;hi&sdotb;as, U&ddotb;ras, M&amacr;gadhas, A&nmacr;gas, Va&nmacr;gas, and Kali&nmacr;gas are to be dark (<hi>çy&amacr;ma</hi>), as also Vaiçyas and Ç&umacr;dras in general, while Brahmins and K&sdotb;atriyas are to be reddish-yellow.

<p>Naturally the hair<note n=4 id=n366.4>N. xxi.</note> attracts attention; Piç&amacr;cas, madmen, and Bh&umacr;tas wear it loose; the Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka is bald; boys have three tufts of hair, and so also servants if it is not cut short; the maidens of Avant&imacr;, and usually those of Bengal, wear ringlets, in the case of women of the north it is worn high on the head, and otherwise plaits are usual. The beard may be bright in hue, dark, or bushy. There is also the same tendency to stereotype <pb n=367 id=pb367 facs="f:367">the ornaments, made out of copper, mica, or wax, and the garlands carried by the various personages; Vidy&amacr;dhar&imacr;s, Yak&sdotb;&imacr;s, Apsarases and N&amacr;g&imacr;s carry pearls and jewels, while the latter are at once recognizable by the snake&apos;s hood rising over their heads, as are Yak&sdotb;as by a large tuft of hair.

<p>The dress and appearance of the actor thus serve in some measure to carry out his duty of representation (<hi>abhinaya</hi>), of presenting before our eyes the states or <corr sic=conkitions>conditions</corr> of the personage for whom he stands. This is the &Amacr;h&amacr;ry&amacr;bhinaya, the first of the four agencies enumerated by the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>. He has also to perform the duty of representation by speech (<hi>v&amacr;cika</hi>), using his voice to convey the dramatist&apos;s words, and by exhibiting <hi lang=la>in propria persona</hi> the appropriate physical counterparts of the feelings and emotions of the characters (<hi>s&amacr;ttvik&amacr;bhinaya</hi>). Finally, he has specially to concentrate on the expression by gesture (<hi>&amacr;&nmacr;gik&amacr;bhinaya</hi>) of the feelings which he is supposed to experience. In this regard most detailed rules are given, doubtless from the technique of a period when more importance attached to gestures than later seems natural. Each member of the body is singled out for description; deep significance lies in the mode in which the head is shaken, the eyes glance, the brows move; cheek, nose, lip, chin, and neck can all be used to convey subtle senses. The hands are invaluable for this purpose; the different man&oelig;uvres with the fingers can convey almost any possible combination of meanings to the person sufficiently acquainted with the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> to understand them. But other parts of the body down to the feet are valuable; great care is bestowed on their postures, and the gait is invaluable in distinguishing classes of persons and their deeds. Darkness need not artificially be induced; movements of hands and feet to indicate groping are enough; one set of movements shows the mounting of a chariot, another the climbing up to the top of a palace; if the garments are pulled up, the crossing of a river is plainly shown; if the motions of swimming are mimicked, clearly the river is too deep to wade; a dexterous movement of the hands shows that one is driving, and similarly one can mount an elephant or a horse.<note n=1 id=n367.1>Cf. the <hi>Abhinayadarpa&ndotb;a</hi> of Nandikeçvara, trs. by A. Coomaraswamy and G. K. Duggirala, Cambridge, Mass., 1917.</note>

<pb n=368 id=pb368 facs="f:368"><p>It is characteristic of the nature of the Indian theory that, while it descends into enormous detail, it leaves alone to all intents and purposes the obvious duty of defining precisely the relation of the varieties of representation described as S&amacr;ttvika and &Amacr;&nmacr;gika. The true relation is that under the head of S&amacr;ttvika are described the physical states, which are deemed appropriate to feelings and emotions, while the &Amacr;&nmacr;gika prescribes the precise physical movements which express most effectively both psychic states and physical movements, which cannot be conveniently presented on the stage. The division accordingly is unscientific, and, acute as is the investigation of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> in detail, it is far from satisfying as a whole.

<p>The importance of such accessories to the representation as garlands, ornaments, and appropriate garments, is emphasized by M&amacr;t&rdotb;gupta, who admits a specific form of sentiment styled Nepathyarasa, a fact which illustrates the effect produced in the mind of the spectator by the details of the <hi>mise-en-scène</hi>. The same impression may be derived from the elaboration of the stage directions in the dramas, comparable only to such as are given, for instance, in Mr. Bernard Shaw&apos;s productions. It is clear that they were intended not only for the direction of the actors in actually performing one of the pieces, but as instruments to aid the reader of the drama in realizing mentally the form of the representation and in appreciating, therefore, the dramatic quality of what he studied. Moreover, we have independent evidence which aids us in seeing how complete these directions are. A fortunate chance has preserved in D&amacr;modaragupta&apos;s <hi>Ku&tdotb;&tdotb;an&imacr;mata</hi>,<note n=1 id=n368.1>856 ff. Cf. the accounts in the <hi><corr sic="Hariva&ndota;ca">Hariva&ndota;ça</corr></hi>, ii. 88&ndash;93.</note> written in the reign of Jay&amacr;p&imacr;&ddotb;a of Kashmir in the eighth century <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi>, an account of the performance of the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi> of Har&sdotb;a. The description is incomplete, but it is perfectly clear that it was played exactly in accordance with the stage directions which have come down to us, embedded in the text of the drama as we have it.

<p>The actual performance of the play was preceded, as we have seen in describing the theory of the drama, by preliminaries, the essential aim of which was the securing of the favour of the gods for the play to be represented. Of the varied elements of the preliminaries special importance seems to have attached to the <pb n=369 id=pb369 facs="f:369">praise of the world guardians (<hi>dikp&amacr;lastuti</hi>), and the reverence paid to Indra&apos;s banner. A reed with five knots is selected which is called Jarjara; the five sections are painted white, blue-black, yellow, red, and a mixture of hues; banners of every colour are tied to it, and the supplication is made to Ga&ndotb;eça, the god who removes obstacles and favours literature, and to the guardians of the quarters of the world.

<p>A religious aspect is given also to the mingling of the pigments, the materials employed being yellow arsenic, lamp black, and red among others. The arsenic is formally addressed as being created by Svayambh&umacr; for the purpose of serving as a pigment; then it is placed on a board with fragments of brick, the whole reduced to fine powder, and mingled, and then used as pigment.<note n=1 id=n369.1><hi>Sa&mdota;g&imacr;tad&amacr;modara</hi>, 39.</note>

<p>The time of the performance is not in many cases stated, but in a number of plays, including the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>, <hi>Kar&ndotb;asundar&imacr;</hi>, and the embryo drama in the <hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi>, we find it assumed to be the moment when the sun is just appearing.<note n=2 id=n369.2>Cf. N&imacr;laka&ndotb;&tdotb;ha&apos;s reason for the alleged abbreviation of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> (Lévi, TI. i. 210).</note> The beat of drum announces the beginning of the drama, the preliminaries, often reduced to little more than a vocal and instrumental concert of brief duration, are completed, and the benediction pronounced, to be followed by the prologue proper and the drama.


<div2 id=ch14.4 n=4>
<head><ab type=divNum>4.</ab> <hi>The Audience</hi></head>

<p>A drama like the Sanskrit demanded the full attention of a cultivated audience, and it is assumed or expressly asserted, as in the dramas of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, Har&sdotb;a, and Bhavabh&umacr;ti, that the spectators are critical and experienced. The <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi><note n=3 id=n369.3>xxvii. 51 ff.; Lévi, TI. ii. 62 ff.</note> requires from the ideal spectator (<hi>prek&sdotb;aka</hi>) keen susceptibility and excellent judgement, with ability to make his own the feelings and emotions of the characters depicted by the actors. But it is admitted that there are the usual degrees among the spectators, good, medium, and indifferent; the question of the success of a drama depends on the judgement of the critic <pb n=370 id=pb370 facs="f:370">(<hi>pr&amacr;çnika</hi>), who is to possess every possible good quality to fit him for the delicate task. The audience, as it is to share the feelings of the characters, is expected to show them by the usual outward signs; laughter, tears, cries, hair standing on end, jumping up from their seats, clapping with the hands and other manifestations of pleasure, horror, fear, and other sentiments are both proper and natural.

<p>The rules for placing the patron at whose bidding the drama is performed, Sabh&amacr;pati, and his guests, are elaborate.<note n=1 id=n370.1><hi>Sa&mdota;g&imacr;taratn&amacr;kara</hi>, 1327 ff.; Lévi, TI. i. 375 ff. Cf. <hi>K&amacr;vyam&imacr;m&amacr;&ndota;s&amacr;</hi>, pp. 54 f.</note> He sits himself on the Lion Throne, the equivalent of the royal box, with the ladies of his harem on the left, and on the right the personages of highest importance, such as the vassal princes of a great king like Har&sdotb;a. Behind the latter are the treasurer and other officers, and near them the learned men of the court, civil and religious, including the poets, and in their midst the astrologers and physicians. On the left again are the ministers and other courtiers; all around are maidens of the court. In front again of the king are Brahmins, behind the bearers of fans, radiant in youthful beauty. On the left in front are the reciters and panegyrists, eloquent and wise. Guards are present to protect the sacred person of the sovereign.

<p>How far the dramas were viewed by the public in general we cannot say; the rules regarding the play-house contemplate the presence of Ç&umacr;dras, but that is a vague term, and may apply to a very restricted class of royal hangers on. We have the general rule<note n=2 id=n370.2>Tagore, <hi>Eight Principal Rasas</hi>, p. 61. That women as such were excluded (Wilson, ii. 212) cannot have held good for the early stage.</note> that barbarians, ignorant people, heretics, and those of low class should not be admitted, but such prescriptions mean very little. There must, it is clear, have been the utmost variation in the character of the audience according to the place and circumstances of representation. At great festivals, when plays were given in the temples, there must have been admission for as many as could be crowded in; in private exhibitions the audience may well have been more select. The fact that the dramas must have been largely unintelligible to all save a select few of the audience would not matter much; a drama was essentially a spectacle; in many cases its subject was perfectly familiar to the <pb n=371 id=pb371 facs="f:371">audience, and the elaborate use of conventional signs must have been enough to aid many of the audience in following roughly the nature of the proceedings.

<p>When such dramatic exhibitions became rare we do not know; it is certain that in the eleventh century in Kashmir they were not uncommon; K&sdotb;emendra advised aspirants to poetic fame to improve their taste by the study of such representations.<note n=1 id=n371.1><hi>Kavika&ndotb;&tdotb;h&amacr;bhara&ndotb;a</hi>, p. 15.</note> Doubtless the Mahomedan conquest seriously affected the vogue of the classical drama, which was obnoxious to Mahomedan fanaticism as being closely identified both with the national religion and the national spirit of India. The kings, who had been the main support of the actors and poets alike, disappeared from their thrones or suffered grave reverses in fortune. The tradition of dramatic performances gradually vanished. Other causes contributed to this end; the divorce between the language of the stage and that of the people steadily increasing with the passage of time made the Sanskrit drama more and more remote to the public, and the Mahomedans made it lose its position as the expression of the official and court life of the highest circles.<note n=2 id=n371.2>A certain revival of displays occurred in the nineteenth century; e.g. the <hi>Citrayajña</hi> of Vaidyan&amacr;tha V&amacr;caspati Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;&amacr;c&amacr;rya, written for the festival of Govinda by request of the R&amacr;j&amacr; of Nadiy&amacr; about <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1820. The Cakkyars of Malabar still act Çaktibhadra&apos;s <hi>&Amacr;çcaryamañjar&imacr;</hi> and Kulaçekharavarman&apos;s plays, as well as Act III of the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, under the style of <hi>Mantr&amacr;&nmacr;kan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, and the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi>; JRAS. 1910, p. 637; <hi>Pratim&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi> (ed. TSS.), p. xl; A. K. and V. R. Pisharoti, <hi>Bulletin of <corr>the </corr>School of Oriental Studies</hi>, III. i. 107 ff., who maintain the impossible view that Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s plays are compilations or adaptations of the eighth century, or later, holding that the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi> is an adaptation of the <hi><corr sic="M&edotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;">M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</corr></hi> (contrast p. 131), the <hi>Pratim&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi> is later than K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, and the <hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi> than Da&ndotb;&ddotb;in. The genealogy of R&amacr;ma in the <hi>Pratim&amacr;</hi> (iv. 9 f.) is that of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, but is also Pur&amacr;&ndotb;ic, and Da&ndotb;&ddotb;in, of course, is not the inventor of the Kath&amacr;. Barnett (<hi>Bulletin</hi>, III. i. 35) accepts Pisharoti&apos;s views, holding the <hi>Ny&amacr;yaç&amacr;stra</hi> of Medh&amacr;tithi (<hi>Pratim&amacr;</hi>, v. 8/9) to be the <hi>Manubh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi> (tenth century), but this is wholly against the context, and Barnett&apos;s view is surely incompatible with the priority of the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi> to the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> which he admits, and the absence of M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr;. Cf. also p. 341.</note>






<pb n=373 id=pb373 facs="f:373">
</body>
<back id=backmatter>
<div1 id=ix.en type=Index>
<head>ENGLISH INDEX</head>


<divGen type=IndexToc>

<div2 id=ix.en.a>
<head>A</head>

<p>Abhayadatta, in the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, <ref target=pb206 type=pageref>206</ref>.

<p>Abhayadeva, king (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1229&ndash;32), <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>.

<p>Abhayakum&amacr;ra, minister of Çre&ndotb;ika, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>.

<p>Abhayap&amacr;la, king, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>.

<p>Abhimanyu, son of Arjuna, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref>, <ref target=pb97 type=pageref>97</ref>, <ref target=pb117 type=pageref>117</ref>, <ref target=pb213 type=pageref>213</ref>.

<p>Abhinavagupta, writer on poetics, <ref target=pb103 type=pageref>103</ref>, <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>, <ref target=pb291 type=pageref>291</ref>, <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>, <ref target=pb319 type=pageref>319</ref>, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>, <ref target=pb343 type=pageref>343</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>.

<p>Abhir&amacr;ma, commentator on the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb154 type=pageref>154</ref>.

<p>&Amacr;bh&imacr;ras, a people, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>, n. <ref target=n337.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>Abrupt dialogue (<hi>udgh&amacr;tya</hi>), <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>, <ref target=pb341 type=pageref>341</ref>.

<p>Abrupt remark (<hi>ga&ndotb;&ddotb;a</hi>), <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>.

<p>Abuse, in ritual, as one source of drama, <ref target=pb24 type=pageref>24</ref>, <ref target=pb25 type=pageref>25</ref>.

<p>Achievements of the Sanskrit drama, <ref target=pb276 type=pageref>276</ref>&ndash;88.

<p>Active, for middle, and <hi>vice versa</hi>, in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb120 type=pageref>120</ref>.

<p>Actors and Actresses, <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>&ndash;4;
  <lb>number of, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>;
  <lb>opening dialogue of, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>;
  <lb>feelings aroused in, <ref target=pb316 type=pageref>316</ref>, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>, <ref target=pb321 type=pageref>321</ref>, <ref target=pb324 type=pageref>324</ref>, <ref target=pb355 type=pageref>355</ref>;
  <lb>see also <hi>Granthikas</hi>, <hi>Çaubhikas</hi>, <hi>Çail&umacr;&sdotb;a</hi>.

<p>Acts, <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref>, <ref target=pb61 type=pageref>61</ref>, <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>&ndash;51.

<p>Address, conventional modes of, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>;
  <lb>as evidence of date of dramatic origin, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>&ndash;71.

<p>&Amacr;dis&umacr;ra, of Bengal, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>.

<p>&Amacr;dityasena, of Magadha (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 671), <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>.

<p>Adultery, as an allegorical character, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.

<p>Advaita form of Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u doctrine, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p>Aerial car, journeys in an, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.

<p>Agastya, a seer, dialogues of, in the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi>, <ref target=pb14 type=pageref>14</ref>.

<p>Aghoragha&ndotb;&tdotb;a, a priest, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>.

<p>Agni, god of fire, dialogue of, with the gods, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>;
  <lb>saves Avim&amacr;raka, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>;
  <lb>saves S&imacr;t&amacr;, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>.

<p>Agnimitra, a prince, hero of the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi>, <ref target=pb147 type=pageref>147</ref>&ndash;9, <ref target=pb165 type=pageref>165</ref>, <ref target=pb364 type=pageref>364</ref>.

<p>Agnivar&ndotb;a, a prince, <ref target=pb364 type=pageref>364</ref>.

<p>Agon, dramatic contest, essential to drama, <ref target=pb45 type=pageref>45</ref>.

<p>Aihole inscription (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 634), mentions K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>.

<p>Aischylos, <ref target=pb75 type=pageref>75</ref>, n. <ref target=n75.2 type=noteref>2</ref>, <ref target=pb196 type=pageref>196</ref>, <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>.

<p>Ajayap&amacr;la, king (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1173&ndash;6), <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>.

<p>Ajit&amacr;p&imacr;&ddotb;a (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 813&ndash;50), king of Kashmir, <ref target=pb291 type=pageref>291</ref>.

<p>&Amacr;j&imacr;vika, in drama, <ref target=pb85 type=pageref>85</ref>.

<p>Ak&amacr;lajalada, grandfather of R&amacr;jaçekhara, <ref target=pb231 type=pageref>231</ref>.

<p>Ak&sdotb;a, son of R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>.

<p>Alak&amacr;, a city, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>, <ref target=pb194 type=pageref>194</ref>.

<p>Alexander of Macedonia, his love of drama, <ref target=pb59 type=pageref>59</ref>.

<p>Alexandria, as source of Greek influence on India, <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref>.

<p>Alkestis, dramatic silence of, compared with that of S&imacr;t&amacr;, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>.

<p>Allegorical drama, Buddhist, <ref target=pb83 type=pageref>83</ref>, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>;
  <lb>later, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>&ndash;6.

<p>Allegorical personages, in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb112 type=pageref>112</ref>.

<p>Alliteration, <ref target=pb238 type=pageref>238</ref>, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>;
  <lb>a characteristic of the Gau&ddotb;a style, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p>Amm&amacr;l &Amacr;c&amacr;rya, author of the <hi>Vasantatilaka</hi>, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p>A&ndotb;ahilap&amacr;&tdotb;aka, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>, <hi>and see</hi> A&ndotb;hilv&amacr;&ddotb;.

<p>&Amacr;nandar&amacr;ya, author of the <hi>J&imacr;v&amacr;nandana</hi>, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>.

<p>&Amacr;nandavardhana, writer on poetics, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>, <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>, <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>.

<p>Ana&nmacr;gahar&sdotb;a M&amacr;trar&amacr;ja, author of <hi>T&amacr;pasavatsar&amacr;jacarita</hi>, <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>.

<p>Ana&nmacr;gamañjar&imacr;, a hetaera, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p>Ana&nmacr;gaçekhara, a <hi>Vi&tdotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>.

<p>Ana&nmacr;gasen&amacr;, a hetaera, <ref target=pb361 type=pageref>361</ref>.

<p>Anas&umacr;y&amacr;, friend of Çakuntal&amacr;, <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>, <ref target=pb158 type=pageref>158</ref>.

<p>Anayasindhu, an evil king, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>, <ref target=pb262 type=pageref>262</ref>.

<p>Andhrabh&rdotb;tyas, dynasty, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>.

<p>Andhraja, speech, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>, n. <ref target=n337.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>Andhras, a people, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>;
  <lb>colour of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>A&nmacr;gada, envoy to R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb119 type=pageref>119</ref>, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>.

<p>A&nmacr;gas, a people, colour of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>Anger (<hi>krodha</hi>), as basis of sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p>A&ndotb;hilv&amacr;&ddotb;, literary activity at court of, <ref target=pb243 type=pageref>243</ref>;
  <lb><hi>and see</hi> A&ndotb;ahilap&amacr;&tdotb;aka.

<p>Anticipatory scene (<hi>a&nmacr;kamukha</hi>), <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>.

<p><hi>Antigone</hi>, of Sophokles, possibly known in India, <ref target=pb59 type=pageref>59</ref>, n. <ref target=n59.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p>Antigone, a character impossible in Sanskrit drama, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>.

<p>Apabhra&ndota;ça, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>, <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>, <ref target=pb175 type=pageref>175</ref>, <ref target=pb187 type=pageref>187</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>, n. <ref target=n336.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>.

<p>Apatouria, <ref target=pb38 type=pageref>38</ref>.

<pb n=374 id=pb374 facs="f:374"><p>Apsarases, divine nymphs, <ref target=pb17 type=pageref>17</ref>, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref>, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>, <ref target=pb112 type=pageref>112</ref>, <ref target=pb114 type=pageref>114</ref>, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>, n. <ref target=n339.3 type=noteref>3</ref>, <ref target=pb352 type=pageref>352</ref>, <ref target=pb367 type=pageref>367</ref>.

<p>&Amacr;ra&ndotb;yak&amacr; or &Amacr;ra&ndotb;yik&amacr;, heroine of the <hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>, <ref target=pb174 type=pageref>174</ref>, <ref target=pb176 type=pageref>176</ref>, <ref target=pb362 type=pageref>362</ref>.

<p>Arhants, views of, on the path of salvation, <ref target=pb183 type=pageref>183</ref>.

<p>Ari&sdotb;&tdotb;a, a demon killed by K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>, <ref target=pb106 type=pageref>106</ref>.

<p>Arisi&ndota;ha, author of the <hi>Suk&rdotb;tasa&mdota;k&imacr;rtana</hi>, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>, n. <ref target=n248.7 type=noteref>7</ref>.

<p>Aristotle, <ref target=pb39 type=pageref>39</ref>, <ref target=pb64 type=pageref>64</ref>, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>, n. <ref target=n279.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>, n. <ref target=n337.2 type=noteref>2</ref>, <ref target=pb354 type=pageref>354</ref>, n. <ref target=n354.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb355 type=pageref>355</ref>.

<p>Arjuna, a demon, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>.

<p>Arjuna, a P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;ava, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref>, <ref target=pb97 type=pageref>97</ref>, <ref target=pb213 type=pageref>213</ref>, <ref target=pb214 type=pageref>214</ref>, <ref target=pb215 type=pageref>215</ref>, <ref target=pb218 type=pageref>218</ref>, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>.

<p>Arjunavarman, Param&amacr;ra of Dh&amacr;r&amacr; (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1211), <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>.

<p>Arrian, notes Indian love for song and dance, <ref target=pb44 type=pageref>44</ref>, n. <ref target=n44.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi lang=la>Ars Amoris</hi>, of Ovid, <ref target=pb285 type=pageref>285</ref>.

<p>Arsenic, used for pigments, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>.

<p>Art of Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>&ndash;10;
  <lb><hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb134 type=pageref>134</ref>;
  <lb>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb155 type=pageref>155</ref>&ndash;60;
  <lb>Har&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb175 type=pageref>175</ref>&ndash;7;
  <lb>Mahendravikramavarman, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>, <ref target=pb183 type=pageref>183</ref>;
  <lb>Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>&ndash;6;
  <lb>Viç&amacr;khadatta, <ref target=pb208 type=pageref>208</ref>, <ref target=pb209 type=pageref>209</ref>;
  <lb>Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a <corr sic="N&amacr;r&amacr;yan">N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</corr>, <ref target=pb214 type=pageref>214</ref>, <ref target=pb215 type=pageref>215</ref>;
  <lb>Yaçovarman, <ref target=pb222 type=pageref>222</ref>, <ref target=pb223 type=pageref>223</ref>;
  <lb>Mur&amacr;ri, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>, <ref target=pb230 type=pageref>230</ref>;
  <lb>R&amacr;jaçekhara, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>, <ref target=pb236 type=pageref>236</ref>;
  <lb>Jayadeva, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>;
  <lb>K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;amiçra, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>.

<p>Arundhat&imacr;, in the <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi>, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>.

<p>&Amacr;ryabha&tdotb;a, astronomer (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 499), <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>.

<p>&Amacr;ryaka, in the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb64 type=pageref>64</ref>, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>, <ref target=pb130 type=pageref>130</ref>, <ref target=pb132 type=pageref>132</ref>, <ref target=pb133 type=pageref>133</ref>, <ref target=pb135 type=pageref>135</ref>.

<p>Aryan, conquers Ç&umacr;dra, in the Mah&amacr;vrata ritual, <ref target=pb24 type=pageref>24</ref>.

<p>Açokadatta, and the R&amacr;k&sdotb;asas, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>, n. <ref target=n193.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p>Açokan dialect, compared with that of Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>.

<p>Açvagho&sdotb;a, dramatist, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>, <ref target=pb70 type=pageref>70</ref>, <ref target=pb72 type=pageref>72</ref>, <ref target=pb74 type=pageref>74</ref>, <ref target=pb77 type=pageref>77</ref>, <ref target=pb80 type=pageref>80</ref>&ndash;90, <ref target=pb93 type=pageref>93</ref>, <ref target=pb94 type=pageref>94</ref>, <ref target=pb95 type=pageref>95</ref>, <ref target=pb158 type=pageref>158</ref>, <ref target=pb161 type=pageref>161</ref>, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>, <ref target=pb292 type=pageref>292</ref>, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p>Açvajit and Ç&amacr;riputra, <ref target=pb81 type=pageref>81</ref>.

<p>Asajj&amacr;ti, a comic Brahmin, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>.

<p>Ascetics, how addressed, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>;
  <lb>appropriate to a Prahasana, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>.

<p>Asides, <ref target=pb304 type=pageref>304</ref>.

<p>Aspirates, reduced in Bh&amacr;sa, but not in Açvagho&sdotb;a, to <hi>h</hi>, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p>Astonishment (<hi>vismaya</hi>), as the basis of the sentiment of wonder, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p>Astrologers, where placed in the auditorium, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p>Asura Maya, magic craftsman, <ref target=pb52 type=pageref>52</ref>.

<p>Asuras, demons, <ref target=pb41 type=pageref>41</ref>, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>.

<p>Atharvan, dialogue of, <ref target=pb15 type=pageref>15</ref>.

<p>&Amacr;treya, the <hi>Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka</hi> of J&imacr;m&umacr;tav&amacr;hana, <ref target=pb177 type=pageref>177</ref>.

<p>&Amacr;trey&imacr;, an ascetic, <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>.

<p>Audience, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>&ndash;71, <hi>and see</hi> Spectators.

<p>Auditorium, <ref target=pb359 type=pageref>359</ref>, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p><hi>Aulularia</hi>, form of name, <ref target=pb64 type=pageref>64</ref>.

<p>Auç&imacr;nar&imacr;, wife of Pur&umacr;ravas, <ref target=pb156 type=pageref>156</ref>.

<p>Authenticity of Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s dramas (very ineffectively attacked in BSOS. III. i. 107 ff.), <ref target=pb91 type=pageref>91</ref>&ndash;3.

<p>Avadh&umacr;ta, <hi>see</hi> K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a.

<p>Avalokit&amacr;, pupil of K&amacr;mandak&imacr;, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>, <ref target=pb362 type=pageref>362</ref>.

<p>Avanibh&amacr;jana, epithet of Mahendravikramavarman, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>.

<p>Avant&imacr;, use of <hi>Bh&umacr;tabh&amacr;&sdotb;&amacr;</hi> in, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>.

<p>Avantisundar&imacr;, wife of R&amacr;jaçekhara, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>, <ref target=pb288 type=pageref>288</ref>.

<p>Avantivarman (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 855&ndash;83) of Kashmir, patron of poets, <ref target=pb204 type=pageref>204</ref>, <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>.

<p>&Amacr;yogavas, actors ranked as, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>.

<p>&Amacr;yus, son of Urvaç&imacr;, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>, <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>, <ref target=pb156 type=pageref>156</ref>, <ref target=pb157 type=pageref>157</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.b>
<head>B</head>

<p>B&amacr;bhravya, chamberlain of Vatsa, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>.

<p>B&amacr;hlika, or B&amacr;lhika, a people, colour of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p><hi>Bakchai</hi>, of Euripides, <ref target=pb59 type=pageref>59</ref>.

<p>Baktria, Greek rule in, <ref target=pb57 type=pageref>57</ref>.

<p>Baladeva, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>.

<p>B&amacr;la-V&amacr;lm&imacr;ki, sobriquet of Mur&amacr;ri, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>.

<p>Bali, binding of, performed in a dramatic manner, <ref target=pb32 type=pageref>32</ref>, <ref target=pb36 type=pageref>36</ref>, n. <ref target=n36.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>Ballet, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>, <ref target=pb275 type=pageref>275</ref>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p>B&amacr;&ndotb;a, the Asura, <ref target=pb242 type=pageref>242</ref>, <ref target=pb243 type=pageref>243</ref>.

<p>B&amacr;&ndotb;a, writer (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 625), <ref target=pb29 type=pageref>29</ref>, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>, <ref target=pb91 type=pageref>91</ref>, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>, n. <ref target=n182.3 type=noteref>3</ref>, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>B&amacr;&ndotb;a, <hi>see</hi> V&amacr;mana Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a B&amacr;&ndotb;a.

<p>Bandhur&amacr;, a go-between, <ref target=pb262 type=pageref>262</ref>.

<p>Barbaras, speech of, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>;
  <lb>excluded from theatres, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p>Barygaza, Bharukacch&amacr;, as port through which Greek influence came, <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref>.

<p>Battles, in the drama, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p>Baudh&amacr;yana, censures actors, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>.

<p>Bearer of fans, where placed in the auditorium, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p>Benediction, see <hi>N&amacr;nd&imacr;</hi> and <hi>Bharatav&amacr;kya</hi>.

<p>Bengal, Sanskrit used in, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>.

<p>Beng&amacr;l&imacr; recension, of the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>;
  <lb>the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb154 type=pageref>154</ref>, <ref target=pb155 type=pageref>155</ref>;
  <lb>the <hi>Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</hi>, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>.

<p>Bernhardt, Sarah, <ref target=pb322 type=pageref>322</ref>, n. <ref target=n322.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p>Bh&amacr;d&amacr;nakas, use of Apabhra&ndota;ça by, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>.

<p>Bhadravat&imacr;, elephant, <ref target=pb108 type=pageref>108</ref>.

<p>Bh&amacr;gur&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, in the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, <ref target=pb205 type=pageref>205</ref>, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>.

<p><corr sic="Bhariav&amacr;nanda">Bhairav&amacr;nanda</corr>, a magician, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>.

<p>Bh&amacr;maha, writer on poetics, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>.

<p>Bh&amacr;nudatta, views on sentiment, <ref target=pb319 type=pageref>319</ref>.

<p>Bh&amacr;numat&imacr;, queen of Duryodhana, <ref target=pb213 type=pageref>213</ref>, <ref target=pb215 type=pageref>215</ref>, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>, <ref target=pb300 type=pageref>300</ref>.

<p>Bharata, alleged author of the <hi><corr sic="N&amacr;tyaç&amacr;stra">N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</corr></hi>, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb41 type=pageref>41</ref>, <ref target=pb150 type=pageref>150</ref>, <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>, <ref target=pb343 type=pageref>343</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>, <ref target=pb349 type=pageref>349</ref>, <ref target=pb362 type=pageref>362</ref>, <ref target=pb364 type=pageref>364</ref>.

<p>Bharata, brother of R&amacr;ma, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>, <ref target=pb224 type=pageref>224</ref>.

<pb n=375 id=pb375 facs="f:375"><p>Bharata, son of Du&hdotb;&sdotb;anta, <ref target=pb154 type=pageref>154</ref>, <ref target=pb157 type=pageref>157</ref>.

<p>Bh&amacr;rata tribe, <ref target=pb30 type=pageref>30</ref>.

<p>Bh&amacr;ravi, poet, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>.

<p>Bharhut sculptures, dance represented on, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>, n. <ref target=n350.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p>Bhart&rdotb;hari, poet, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>;
  <lb>celebrated in the <hi>Bhart&rdotb;harinirveda</hi>, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>.

<p>Bhart&rdotb;me&ndotb;&tdotb;ha, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>.

<p>Bh&amacr;sa, dramatist, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>, <ref target=pb51 type=pageref>51</ref>, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>, <ref target=pb70 type=pageref>70</ref>, <ref target=pb73 type=pageref>73</ref>, <ref target=pb74 type=pageref>74</ref>, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb91 type=pageref>91</ref>&ndash;126, <ref target=pb147 type=pageref>147</ref>, <ref target=pb161 type=pageref>161</ref>, <ref target=pb185 type=pageref>185</ref>, <ref target=pb187 type=pageref>187</ref>, n. <ref target=n187.2 type=noteref>2</ref>, <ref target=pb243 type=pageref>243</ref>, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>, <ref target=pb286 type=pageref>286</ref>, <ref target=pb292 type=pageref>292</ref><corr sic=";">,</corr> <ref target=pb300 type=pageref>300</ref>, <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>, n. <ref target=n301.4 type=noteref>4</ref>, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>, <ref target=pb341 type=pageref>341</ref>, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>, <ref target=pb354 type=pageref>354</ref>, <ref target=pb371 type=pageref>371</ref>, n. <ref target=n371.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p>Bh&amacr;skaradatta, a Mah&amacr;r&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb204 type=pageref>204</ref>.

<p>Bh&amacr;skara Kavi, author of the <hi><corr sic="Ummattar&amacr;ghava">Unmattar&amacr;ghava</corr></hi>, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>.

<p>Bh&amacr;&tdotb;, reciters, <ref target=pb30 type=pageref>30</ref>.

<p>Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a Gop&amacr;la, grandfather of Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb186 type=pageref>186</ref>.

<p>Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a Lolla&tdotb;a, doctrine of sentiment, <ref target=pb316 type=pageref>316</ref>.

<p>Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, author of the <hi>Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</hi>, <ref target=pb83 type=pageref>83</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>&ndash;19.

<p>Bhattanatha Svamin, on date of Mur&amacr;ri, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>.

<p>Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;yaka, writer on poetics, <ref target=pb291 type=pageref>291</ref>, <ref target=pb317 type=pageref>317</ref>, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>, <ref target=pb321 type=pageref>321</ref>.

<p>Bhavabh&umacr;ti, dramatist, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>, <ref target=pb139 type=pageref>139</ref>, <ref target=pb161 type=pageref>161</ref>, <ref target=pb186 type=pageref>186</ref>&ndash;203, <ref target=pb209 type=pageref>209</ref>, <ref target=pb217 type=pageref>217</ref>, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>, <ref target=pb226 type=pageref>226</ref>, <ref target=pb227 type=pageref>227</ref>, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref>, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>, <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>, <ref target=pb343 type=pageref>343</ref>, n. <ref target=n343.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb352 type=pageref>352</ref>, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>, <ref target=pb364 type=pageref>364</ref>.

<p>Bh&imacr;ma, a P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;ava, <ref target=pb95 type=pageref>95</ref>, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref>, <ref target=pb97 type=pageref>97</ref>, <ref target=pb109 type=pageref>109</ref>, <ref target=pb213 type=pageref>213</ref>, <ref target=pb214 type=pageref>214</ref>, <ref target=pb215 type=pageref>215</ref>, <ref target=pb216 type=pageref>216</ref>, <ref target=pb218 type=pageref>218</ref>, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>, <ref target=pb304 type=pageref>304</ref>, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>.

<p>Bh&imacr;madeva II, the C&amacr;lukya, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>.

<p>Bh&imacr;ma&tdotb;a, author of <hi>Svapnadaç&amacr;nana</hi>, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref>.

<p>Bh&imacr;meçvara, procession of the god, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>.

<p>Bh&imacr;&sdotb;ma, preceptor of the Kauravas, <ref target=pb97 type=pageref>97</ref>.

<p>Bhoja (11th cent.), writer on poetics (JRAS. 1923, p. 545 ff.), <ref target=pb143 type=pageref>143</ref>, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>, n. <ref target=n325.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p>Bhuja&nmacr;gaçekhara, a <hi>Vi&tdotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>.

<p>Bh&umacr;rivasu, a minister, <ref target=pb187 type=pageref>187</ref>.

<p><corr sic="Bht&umacr;as">Bh&umacr;tas</corr>, honoured in the preliminaries of the drama, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>.

<p>Bhuvanap&amacr;la, minister of Sa&mdota;gr&amacr;masi&ndota;ha, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>.

<p>Bidy&amacr;pati &Tdotb;h&amacr;kur, Maithil&imacr; dramatist, <ref target=pb243 type=pageref>243</ref>.

<p>Bilha&ndotb;a, author of the <hi>Kar&ndotb;asundar&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>.

<p>Bimbis&amacr;ra, king of Magadha, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>.

<p>Bloch, Th., on the Greek origin of the Indian theatre, <ref target=pb67 type=pageref>67</ref>.

<p>Bourgeois Comedy, see <hi>Prakara&ndotb;a</hi> and <hi>Prakara&ndotb;ik&amacr;</hi>.

<p>Boy, suggested marriage to, as a motif, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>.

<p>B&rdotb;hannal&amacr;, a eunuch, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>.

<p>Brahm&amacr;, as creator of the <hi><corr sic="N&amacr;tyaç&amacr;stra">N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</corr></hi>, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb13 type=pageref>13</ref>, <ref target=pb41 type=pageref>41</ref>.

<p>Brahmadeva, of Raypur, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.

<p>Brahmin and hetaera, dialogue of, <ref target=pb39 type=pageref>39</ref>, <ref target=pb73 type=pageref>73</ref>.

<p>Brahminical supremacy, in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>;
  <lb>in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>;
  <lb>in Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>;
  <lb>theory of life, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>.

<p>Brahmin, <ref target=pb81 type=pageref>81</ref>, <ref target=pb276 type=pageref>276</ref>, <ref target=pb277 type=pageref>277</ref>, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>, <ref target=pb283 type=pageref>283</ref>, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>;
  <lb>as the <hi>Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka</hi>, <ref target=pb310 type=pageref>310</ref>, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>;
  <lb>address of, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>;
  <lb>as hero of the <hi>Prakara&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>;
  <lb>the <hi>Çilpaka</hi>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>;
  <lb>seats for, <ref target=pb359 type=pageref>359</ref>;
  <lb>colour of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>;
  <lb>where placed in the auditorium, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p>Brajbh&amacr;sh&amacr;, <ref target=pb41 type=pageref>41</ref>.

<p>Breach of alliance (<hi>sa&mdota;gh&amacr;tya</hi>), <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p>Buddha, the, <ref target=pb81 type=pageref>81</ref>, <ref target=pb82 type=pageref>82</ref>, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb179 type=pageref>179</ref>;
  <lb>statues of the, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>;
  <lb>as a dramatic character, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>.

<p>Buddharak&sdotb;it&amacr;, in the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>, <ref target=pb198 type=pageref>198</ref>.

<p>Buddhism, disapproved, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>.

<p>Buddhist monk, <ref target=pb135 type=pageref>135</ref>;
  <lb>nun, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>.

<p>Buddhists, and the drama, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>, <ref target=pb44 type=pageref>44</ref>, <ref target=pb174 type=pageref>174</ref>, <ref target=pb175 type=pageref>175</ref>, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>;
  <lb>addressed as Bhadanta, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.c>
<head>C</head>


<p>C&amacr;ham&amacr;na, V&imacr;saladeva Vigrahar&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>.

<p>Caitanya, the saint, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>.

<p>Cakkyars, or C&amacr;ky&amacr;rs, performance of plays by, <ref target=pb371 type=pageref>371</ref>, n. <ref target=n371.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>Cakora, Candraketu, prince of, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>.

<p>Cakrasv&amacr;min, festival of, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>.

<p>Calm, as a character, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>;
  <lb>hero, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>.

<p>Calm (<hi>ç&amacr;nta</hi>), sentiment, <ref target=pb324 type=pageref>324</ref>, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p>Cambay, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>.

<p>C&amacr;mu&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;, the goddess, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>.

<p>C&amacr;&ndotb;akya, in the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>, <ref target=pb205 type=pageref>205</ref> ff., <ref target=pb341 type=pageref>341</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>.

<p>Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;abh&amacr;rgava, curse of, <ref target=pb125 type=pageref>125</ref>.

<p>Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;las, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>, <ref target=pb133 type=pageref>133</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>, n. <ref target=n336.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>.

<p>Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;l&imacr;, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>.

<p>Candanad&amacr;sa, in the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, <ref target=pb205 type=pageref>205</ref> ff.

<p>Candanaka, Pr&amacr;krit used by, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>.

<p>Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;ap&amacr;la, a king, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>.

<p>Candra, Candraka, or Candaka, dramatist, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>&ndash;70.

<p>Candrad&amacr;sa, an author, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>.

<p>Candragupta, in the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, <ref target=pb205 type=pageref>205</ref> ff., <ref target=pb341 type=pageref>341</ref>.

<p>Candragupta II, probable patron of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>.

<p>Candraketu, prince of Cakora, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>.

<p>Candraketu, rival of Lava, <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>, <ref target=pb200 type=pageref>200</ref>.

<p>Candraçekhara, commentator on the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb154 type=pageref>154</ref>.

<p>Candravarman, of L&amacr;&tdotb;a, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>.

<p>Candr&amacr;vat&imacr;, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>.

<p>C&amacr;&ndotb;&umacr;ra, slain by K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>.

<p><hi>Captivi</hi>, of Plautus, <ref target=pb64 type=pageref>64</ref>.

<p>C&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, a Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>, <ref target=pb300 type=pageref>300</ref>.

<p>C&amacr;rudatta, hero of the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi>, <ref target=pb104 type=pageref>104</ref>, <ref target=pb116 type=pageref>116</ref>, <ref target=pb131 type=pageref>131</ref>, <ref target=pb132 type=pageref>132</ref>, <ref target=pb133 type=pageref>133</ref>, <ref target=pb134 type=pageref>134</ref>, <ref target=pb135 type=pageref>135</ref>, <ref target=pb136 type=pageref>136</ref>, <ref target=pb137 type=pageref>137</ref>&ndash;40, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>.

<p>C&amacr;rv&amacr;ka, atheist, philosopher, <ref target=pb214 type=pageref>214</ref>, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p>Caryatides, possibly imitated in the Indian theatre, <ref target=pb355 type=pageref>355</ref>.

<p>Ca&sdotb;&tdotb;ana, a K&sdotb;atrapa, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>.

<pb n=376 id=pb376 facs="f:376"><p>Caste system, denounced by Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb80 type=pageref>80</ref>.

<p>Causative, and simple verbal forms, confused in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb120 type=pageref>120</ref>, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p>Cave, mountain, similarity of theatre to, <ref target=pb358 type=pageref>358</ref>.

<p>Cedi era, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>.

<p>Cerebral sibilants, produce strength of style, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p>Cerebralization of <hi>n</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s Pr&amacr;krits, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p>Cerebrals, other than <hi>&ndotb;</hi>, produce strength of style, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p>Ceylon, king of, father of Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>.

<p>Challenge (<hi>utth&amacr;paka</hi>), <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p>Chamberlain (<hi>kañcukin</hi>), <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>;
  <lb>appropriate to the <hi>Prahasana</hi>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>.

<p>Change of action (<hi>parivartaka</hi>), <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p>Character drawing, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>;
  <lb>in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>;
  <lb><hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb134 type=pageref>134</ref>, <ref target=pb135 type=pageref>135</ref>, <ref target=pb137 type=pageref>137</ref>;
  <lb>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb155 type=pageref>155</ref>&ndash;9;
  <lb>Har&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb176 type=pageref>176</ref>, <ref target=pb177 type=pageref>177</ref><corr sic=":">;</corr>
  <lb>Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>, <ref target=pb194 type=pageref>194</ref>;
  <lb>Viç&amacr;khadatta, <ref target=pb208 type=pageref>208</ref>, <ref target=pb209 type=pageref>209</ref>;
  <lb>Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb215 type=pageref>215</ref>;
  <lb>R&amacr;jaçekhara, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>.

<p>Characters in the drama, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>&ndash;14, <ref target=pb355 type=pageref>355</ref>.

<p>Characteristics of the Sanskrit drama, <ref target=pb276 type=pageref>276</ref>&ndash;88.

<p>Charcoal burners, speech of, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>.

<p>Cheating (<hi>chala</hi>), <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>;
  <lb>in the <hi>Samavak&amacr;ra</hi>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>.

<p>Chess, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>.

<p>Child, mode of address of, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>, n. <ref target=n314.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p>Chinese stage, <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>, note <ref target=n360.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>Cistellaria</hi>, form of name, <ref target=pb64 type=pageref>64</ref>.

<p>Citram&amacr;ya (Citram&amacr;yu), friend of R&amacr;ma, <ref target=pb223 type=pageref>223</ref>.

<p>Citraratha, associated with Indra, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>, <ref target=pb194 type=pageref>194</ref>.

<p>Clay elephants, children play with, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>.

<p>Clearness, of style, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p>Coarseness of the <hi>Prahasanas</hi> and <hi>Bh&amacr;&ndotb;as</hi>, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>.

<p>Cock-fights, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>, <ref target=pb285 type=pageref>285</ref>.

<p>Colour of curtain, <ref target=pb359 type=pageref>359</ref>;
  <lb>dress of actors, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>;
  <lb>participators in dramatic performances, <ref target=pb35 type=pageref>35</ref>, <ref target=pb36 type=pageref>36</ref>, <ref target=pb37 type=pageref>37</ref>, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>;
  <lb>sentiments, <ref target=pb324 type=pageref>324</ref>;
  <lb>Indra&apos;s banner, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>;
  <lb>pillars of the auditorium, <ref target=pb359 type=pageref>359</ref>.

<p>Combats, in the <hi>&Ddotb;ima</hi>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>;
  <lb>the <hi>Pre&nmacr;kha&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p>Comedy, Greek, origin of, <ref target=pb39 type=pageref>39</ref>, n. <ref target=n39.2 type=noteref>2</ref>;
  <lb>influence of, on Sanskrit drama, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>&ndash;66.

<p>Comedy, Sanskrit drama deficient in higher forms of, <ref target=pb280 type=pageref>280</ref>, <ref target=pb354 type=pageref>354</ref>, and see <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, and <hi>Prakara&ndotb;a</hi>.

<p>Comic dialogue (<hi>prapañca</hi>), <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>.

<p>Comic (<hi>h&amacr;sya</hi>) sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>, <ref target=pb324 type=pageref>324</ref>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>. <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p>Compassion, as a character, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>.

<p>Compensatory lengthening of a vowel, with reduction of consonant groups, in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p>Competitions for poets, <ref target=pb286 type=pageref>286</ref>.

<p>Compound letters, produce strength of style, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p>Compounds, <ref target=pb217 type=pageref>217</ref>, <ref target=pb274 type=pageref>274</ref>, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>, <ref target=pb333 type=pageref>333</ref>;
  <lb>irregular forms in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p>Conclusion (<hi>nirvaha&ndotb;a</hi>) as fifth juncture of the drama, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>.

<p>Concubinage, as an allegorical character, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.

<p>Confiscation of property of persons dying without heirs, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>.

<p>Conflict in character, un-known to Indian drama, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>.

<p>Confusion, as an allegorical character, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.

<p>Conjunct consonants, produce strength of style, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p>Conscience, struggle of, unknown in Sanskrit drama, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>.

<p>Consequents (<hi>anubh&amacr;va</hi>), in dramatic theory, <ref target=pb315 type=pageref>315</ref> ff.

<p>Construction, immediate, of an object by artificial means (<hi>sa&mdota;k&sdotb;ipti</hi>), <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p>Contemplation, as an allegorical character, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p>Contentment, as an allegorical character, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p>Contest, as essential element of the drama, <ref target=pb45 type=pageref>45</ref>, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>.

<p>Continuance (<hi>avalagita</hi>), <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>.

<p>Continuation scene (<hi>a&nmacr;k&amacr;vat&amacr;ra</hi>), <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>.

<p>Contractions, irregular, in Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s Sanskrit, <ref target=pb120 type=pageref>120</ref>.

<p>Cora Indians, dramatic ritual of, <ref target=pb18 type=pageref>18</ref>, <ref target=pb19 type=pageref>19</ref>.

<p>Corpse, revival of, as dramatic motif, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>.

<p>Cosmopolitan character, ascribed to the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb139 type=pageref>139</ref>, <ref target=pb140 type=pageref>140</ref>.

<p>Courteous, hero, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>.

<p>Courtesans, <hi>see</hi> Hetaerae.

<p>Courtiers, where placed in the auditorium, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p>Courts, as patrons of the drama, <ref target=pb285 type=pageref>285</ref>, <ref target=pb362 type=pageref>362</ref>.

<p>Crassus, Iason and the head of, <ref target=pb59 type=pageref>59</ref>.

<p>Creation of object by magic (<hi>vast&umacr;tth&amacr;pana</hi>), <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p>Creeper, Urvaç&imacr; transformed into a, <ref target=pb150 type=pageref>150</ref>, <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>, <ref target=pb156 type=pageref>156</ref>.

<p>Critique of life, lacking in Sanskrit drama, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>, <ref target=pb195 type=pageref>195</ref>, <ref target=pb196 type=pageref>196</ref>, <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>, <ref target=pb280 type=pageref>280</ref>, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>, <ref target=pb354 type=pageref>354</ref>.

<p>Cult, as an allegorical character, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p>Curse, as a dramatic motif, <ref target=pb125 type=pageref>125</ref>, <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>, <ref target=pb157 type=pageref>157</ref>, <ref target=pb158 type=pageref>158</ref>.

<p>Curtain of theatre, <ref target=pb61 type=pageref>61</ref>, <ref target=pb67 type=pageref>67</ref>, <ref target=pb68 type=pageref>68</ref>, <ref target=pb113 type=pageref>113</ref>, n. <ref target=n113.1 type=noteref>1</ref>;
  <lb>colour of, <ref target=pb359 type=pageref>359</ref> (cf. Elizabethan curtain, with colours varying as in India according to subject, GIL. iii. 177, n. 1).


<pb n=377 id=pb377 facs="f:377">
<div2 id=ix.en.d>
<head>D</head>

<p>Dadhittha, a monkey, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>.

<p>Daityas, propitiated in the preliminaries of the drama, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>, n. <ref target=n339.3 type=noteref>3</ref>.

<p>Dak&sdotb;i&ndotb;&amacr;vartan&amacr;tha, commentator on the <hi>Meghad&umacr;ta</hi>, <ref target=pb145 type=pageref>145</ref>.

<p>D&amacr;modara, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>, <hi>and see</hi> K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a.

<p>D&amacr;modaragupta, author of the <hi>Ku&tdotb;&tdotb;an&imacr;mata</hi>, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>, <ref target=pb362 type=pageref>362</ref>, <ref target=pb368 type=pageref>368</ref>.

<p>D&amacr;modaramiçra, redactor of the <hi>Mah&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.

<p>D&amacr;navas, demons, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>, <hi>n.</hi> <ref target=pb3 type=pageref>3</ref>, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>Dance, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb15 type=pageref>15</ref>, <ref target=pb16 type=pageref>16</ref>, <ref target=pb25 type=pageref>25</ref>, <ref target=pb26 type=pageref>26</ref>, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>, <ref target=pb44 type=pageref>44</ref>, <ref target=pb45 type=pageref>45</ref>, <ref target=pb50 type=pageref>50</ref>, <ref target=pb57 type=pageref>57</ref>, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>, <ref target=pb112 type=pageref>112</ref>, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>, <ref target=pb291 type=pageref>291</ref>, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p>Da&ndotb;&ddotb;in, author, <ref target=pb104 type=pageref>104</ref>, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>, <ref target=pb221 type=pageref>221</ref>, <ref target=pb330 type=pageref>330</ref>, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>.

<p>Dantivarman, dubious name of a king, <ref target=pb204 type=pageref>204</ref>.

<p>Dantur&amacr;, a go-between, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>.

<p>Daçapura, use of <hi>Bh&umacr;tabh&amacr;&sdotb;&amacr;</hi> in, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>.

<p>Daçaratha, a king, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>, <ref target=pb226 type=pageref>226</ref>, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>.

<p>Daç&amacr;rha festival, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>.

<p>Date of Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s dramas, <ref target=pb93 type=pageref>93</ref>&ndash;5.

<p>Dead, worship of, and drama, <ref target=pb46 type=pageref>46</ref>, <ref target=pb47 type=pageref>47</ref>.

<p>Death on the stage, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>, <ref target=pb140 type=pageref>140</ref>, <ref target=pb292 type=pageref>292</ref>, <ref target=pb354 type=pageref>354</ref>.

<p>Deccan, colour of people of the, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>;
  <lb>dramatic performances in the, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>.

<p>Deceitful hero, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>.

<p>Decline of the drama, causes of, <ref target=pb242 type=pageref>242</ref>&ndash;4.

<p>Demi-gods, as heroes of the <hi>&Ddotb;ima</hi>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref><corr>.</corr>

<p>Demons, as heroes of the <hi>&Ddotb;ima</hi>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>, <hi>and see</hi> Daityas, D&amacr;navas, R&amacr;k&sdotb;asas.

<p><hi>Dénouement</hi> (<hi>k&amacr;rya</hi>), as an element of the plot, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>;
  <lb>wonder appropriate in the, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>.

<p>Desire, as a character, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>.

<p>Determinants (<hi>vibh&amacr;va</hi>), in dramatic theory, <ref target=pb315 type=pageref>315</ref> ff.

<p><hi lang=la>Deus ex machina</hi>, Gaur&imacr; as, <ref target=pb175 type=pageref>175</ref>, <ref target=pb176 type=pageref>176</ref>.

<p>Devaj&imacr;, father of R&amacr;mak&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb274 type=pageref>274</ref>.

<p>Devak&imacr;, mother of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>, <ref target=pb98 type=pageref>98</ref>.

<p>Devan&amacr;gar&imacr; recension, of the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb154 type=pageref>154</ref>, <ref target=pb155 type=pageref>155</ref>;
  <lb>the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>;
  <lb>the <hi>Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</hi>, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>.

<p>Devap&amacr;la of M&amacr;lava, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>.

<p>Devar&amacr;ta, a minister, <ref target=pb187 type=pageref>187</ref>.

<p>Devasom&amacr;, a damsel attached to a Çaiva mendicant, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>, <ref target=pb185 type=pageref>185</ref>.

<p>Deva S&umacr;ri, Jain sage, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>.

<p>Development (<hi>garbha</hi>), third juncture of the drama, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>.

<p>Development of affection (<hi>narmagarbha</hi>), <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p>Devil, in mediaeval mystery plays, <ref target=pb24 type=pageref>24</ref>, <ref target=pb39 type=pageref>39</ref>.

<p>Devotion, as a sentiment, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>, n. <ref target=n325.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>Dhanadeva, father of Yaça&hdotb;p&amacr;la, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>.

<p>Dhana&mdota;jaya, writer on poetics, <ref target=pb292 type=pageref>292</ref>, <ref target=pb321 type=pageref>321</ref>, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>.

<p>Dh&amacr;na&mdota;jaya, in a Buddhist drama, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>.

<p>Dhaneçvara, father of Jyotir&imacr;çvara, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>.

<p>Dhanika, writer on poetics, <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>, <ref target=pb223 type=pageref>223</ref>, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref>, <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref>, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>Dhanika Pa&ndotb;&ddotb;ita, <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref>.

<p>Dh&amacr;r&amacr;var&sdotb;a, prince of Candr&amacr;vat&imacr;, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>.

<p>Dh&amacr;ri&ndotb;&imacr;, a queen, <ref target=pb148 type=pageref>148</ref>, <ref target=pb149 type=pageref>149</ref>, <ref target=pb155 type=pageref>155</ref>, <ref target=pb159 type=pageref>159</ref>, <ref target=pb163 type=pageref>163</ref>, <ref target=pb165 type=pageref>165</ref>.

<p>Dh&amacr;vaka, misreading for Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>.

<p>Dh&imacr;rasi&ndota;ha, father of Jyotir&imacr;çvara, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>.

<p>Dh&imacr;reçvara, family, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>.

<p>Dialogue (<hi>sa&mdota;l&amacr;pa</hi>), <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p>Dialogues of the Veda, alleged dramatic character of the, <ref target=pb13 type=pageref>13</ref>&ndash;23.

<p>Digambara Jainism, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p>Diggers of underground passages, speech of (cf. JRAS. 1923, p. 591), <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p>Dign&amacr;ga, alleged enemy of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb145 type=pageref>145</ref>.

<p>Dionysos, Greek god, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>.

<p>Dionysos, Indian, i.e. Çiva, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>, n. <ref target=n42.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>Dionysos Melanaigis, <ref target=pb38 type=pageref>38</ref>.

<p>Discrimination, as a character, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.

<p>Disguise, of girl as boy, as motif, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>.

<p>Disguise, assumed on the stage, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>.

<p>Disgust (<hi>jugups&amacr;</hi>), as the basis of the sentiment of horror, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p>Dithyramb, and drama, <ref target=pb39 type=pageref>39</ref>.

<p>Division into acts, <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref>, <ref target=pb61 type=pageref>61</ref>.

<p>Division of sentiment, not allowed in the drama, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>.

<p>Doors of the stage, number of, <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>.

<p>Double consonant, with short vowel, in place of single consonant and long vowel, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p><hi>Double entendre</hi>, <ref target=pb304 type=pageref>304</ref>.

<p>D&rdotb;&ddotb;havarman, uncle of V&amacr;savadatt&amacr;, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>, <ref target=pb174 type=pageref>174</ref>, <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>.

<p>Dh&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;adyumna, slays Dro&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb213 type=pageref>213</ref>.

<p>Dh&rdotb;tar&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;ra, a king, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref>, <ref target=pb106 type=pageref>106</ref>, <ref target=pb117 type=pageref>117</ref>, <ref target=pb214 type=pageref>214</ref>, <ref target=pb216 type=pageref>216</ref>, <ref target=pb218 type=pageref>218</ref>.

<p>Double letters, produce strength of style, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p>Dramatic elements in Vedic ritual, <ref target=pb23 type=pageref>23</ref>&ndash;7.

<p>Dramilas, speech of the, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>, n. <ref target=n337.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <hi>and see</hi> Dravi&ddotb;as.

<p>Draupad&imacr;, wife of the P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;avas, <ref target=pb63 type=pageref>63</ref>, <ref target=pb97 type=pageref>97</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>, <ref target=pb213 type=pageref>213</ref>, <ref target=pb214 type=pageref>214</ref>, <ref target=pb218 type=pageref>218</ref>, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.

<p>Dravi&ddotb;as, speech of, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>;
  <lb>colour of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>Dream, as motif, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>;
  <lb>truthful in early hours of morning, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>.

<p>Dress of actors, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>Drinking, as an allegorical character, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.

<p>Dro&ndotb;a, preceptor of the Kauravas, <ref target=pb97 type=pageref>97</ref>, <ref target=pb213 type=pageref>213</ref>.

<p>Drop, or expansion (<hi>bindu</hi>), as an element of the plot, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>.

<pb n=378 id=pb378 facs="f:378"><p>Duhika, variant of Durduka, <ref target=pb231 type=pageref>231</ref>.

<p>Du&hdotb;ç&amacr;sana, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>, <ref target=pb214 type=pageref>214</ref>, <ref target=pb216 type=pageref>216</ref>.

<p>Du&hdotb;&sdotb;anta (Du&sdotb;yanta), a king, hero of the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb152 type=pageref>152</ref>&ndash;5, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>, <ref target=pb341 type=pageref>341</ref>, <ref target=pb365 type=pageref>365</ref>.

<p>Dumb actors, <ref target=pb53 type=pageref>53</ref>, <ref target=pb273 type=pageref>273</ref>.

<p>Dundubhi, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>.

<p>Dur&amacr;c&amacr;ra, a pupil, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>.

<p>Duration of acts of certain dramas, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p>Durduka, father of R&amacr;jaçekhara, <ref target=pb231 type=pageref>231</ref>.

<p>Durg&amacr;p&umacr;j&amacr;, festival in Bengal, <ref target=pb262 type=pageref>262</ref>.

<p>Durmukha, in the <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi>, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>.

<p>Durv&amacr;sas, an ascetic, <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>, <ref target=pb158 type=pageref>158</ref>, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>.

<p>Duryodhana, chief of the Kauravas, <ref target=pb38 type=pageref>38</ref>, n. <ref target=n38.2 type=noteref>2</ref>, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref>, <ref target=pb97 type=pageref>97</ref>, <ref target=pb106 type=pageref>106</ref>, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>, <ref target=pb114 type=pageref>114</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>, <ref target=pb214 type=pageref>214</ref>, <ref target=pb215 type=pageref>215</ref>, <ref target=pb216 type=pageref>216</ref>, <ref target=pb218 type=pageref>218</ref>, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>, <ref target=pb300 type=pageref>300</ref>, <ref target=pb304 type=pageref>304</ref>, <ref target=pb309 type=pageref>309</ref>, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>, <ref target=pb354 type=pageref>354</ref>.

<p>Duty, as superior to private interest, in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>, <ref target=pb154 type=pageref>154</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.e>
<head>E</head>

<p>Eclecticism of classical age of Sanskrit literature, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>.

<p>Egoism, as a character, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p>Ekbatana, Greek artistes at, <ref target=pb59 type=pageref>59</ref>.

<p>Elements of the plot (<hi>arthaprak&rdotb;ti</hi>), <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>.

<p>Elephant, artificial, to contain men, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>;
  <lb>terrifies people in the street, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>.

<p>Elephants, escape of, as dramatic motif, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>.

<p>Elision of consonants, not in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>;
  <lb>in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>;
  <lb>with compensatory lengthening, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p>Emotion (<hi>bh&amacr;va</hi>), <ref target=pb277 type=pageref>277</ref>, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>, <ref target=pb316 type=pageref>316</ref>&ndash;26.

<p>Energy (<hi>uts&amacr;ha</hi>), as basis of heroic sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p>Enigma (<hi>n&amacr;lik&amacr;</hi>), <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>.

<p>Epics, and the drama, <ref target=pb27 type=pageref>27</ref>, <ref target=pb28 type=pageref>28</ref>&ndash;31, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>, <ref target=pb45 type=pageref>45</ref>, <ref target=pb47 type=pageref>47</ref>, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>, <ref target=pb63 type=pageref>63</ref>, <ref target=pb75 type=pageref>75</ref>, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref><corr sic=",">;</corr>
  <lb>original form of, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>&ndash;3.

<p><hi>Epidicus</hi>, of Plautus, <ref target=pb64 type=pageref>64</ref>.

<p>Episode (<hi>pat&amacr;k&amacr;</hi>), <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>.

<p>Equivoke, as dramatic motif, <ref target=pb304 type=pageref>304</ref>.

<p>Erotic (<hi>ç&rdotb;&nmacr;g&amacr;ra</hi>), sentiment, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>, <ref target=pb324 type=pageref>324</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>, <ref target=pb349 type=pageref>349</ref>, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>;
  <lb>metre and style appropriate to, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p>Eunuchs, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>;
  <lb>in the <hi>Prahasana</hi>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>.

<p>Euripides, <ref target=pb59 type=pageref>59</ref>, <ref target=pb196 type=pageref>196</ref>, <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>, n. <ref target=n279.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>.

<p>Exalted, hero, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>.

<p>Excitement, sentiment of, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>.

<p>Exegesis, as an allegorical character, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p>Expansion (<hi>bindu</hi>), as element of the plot, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.f>
<head>F</head>

<p>Fainting, as a dramatic motif, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>, <ref target=pb224 type=pageref>224</ref>, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>.

<p>Faith, as a character, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>;
  <lb>as a sentiment, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>, n. <ref target=n325.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>Faith in Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u, as a character, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>.

<p>Falsity, as a character, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p>Farce (<hi>prahasana</hi>), <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>&ndash;5, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>&ndash;3, <ref target=pb280 type=pageref>280</ref>, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>, <ref target=pb309 type=pageref>309</ref>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>.

<p>Fate, <ref target=pb140 type=pageref>140</ref>, <ref target=pb277 type=pageref>277</ref>, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>.

<p>Fear, sentiment of, <ref target=pb319 type=pageref>319</ref>, <ref target=pb324 type=pageref>324</ref>, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>.

<p>Festivals, occasions of performance of dramas, <ref target=pb362 type=pageref>362</ref>.

<p>Fifth manner, existence of, denied, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>, n. <ref target=n328.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>Fifth Veda, nature of the, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb13 type=pageref>13</ref>.

<p>Fighting (<hi>samphe&tdotb;a</hi>), <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>.

<p>Figures of speech, <ref target=pb116 type=pageref>116</ref>, <ref target=pb117 type=pageref>117</ref>, <ref target=pb211 type=pageref>211</ref>, <ref target=pb330 type=pageref>330</ref>, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>, <ref target=pb333 type=pageref>333</ref>, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>.

<p>Fire, imaginary, as a dramatic motif, <ref target=pb103 type=pageref>103</ref>, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>.

<p>Fleet, Dr. J. F., theory of origin of Cedi era, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>.

<p>Flesh-eating, as an allegorical character, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.

<p>Flesh-offering, to the ghouls of the cemetery, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>.

<p>Forest dwellers, speech of, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>.

<p>Fortune of the City, as an allegorical character, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.

<p>French borrowings from the classics, <ref target=pb68 type=pageref>68</ref>.

<p>Friendship, in Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb195 type=pageref>195</ref>, <ref target=pb196 type=pageref>196</ref>;
  <lb>sentiment of, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>, n. <ref target=n325.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>Frog hymn (RV. vii. 103), <ref target=pb19 type=pageref>19</ref>.

<p>Funeral games, and the origin of drama, <ref target=pb47 type=pageref>47</ref>.

<p>Fury, sentiment of, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>, <ref target=pb324 type=pageref>324</ref>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>;
  <lb>metre and style appropriate to, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.g>
<head>G</head>

<p>Gamblers (<hi>d&imacr;vyant</hi>), language of, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p>Gambler&apos;s hymn (RV. x. 24), <ref target=pb19 type=pageref>19</ref>.

<p>Gambling, as an allegorical character, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.

<p>Ga&ndotb;ad&amacr;sa, a dancing-master, <ref target=pb148 type=pageref>148</ref>.

<p>Gandh&amacr;ra, art of, relation to Greek art, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>.

<p>G&amacr;ndh&amacr;r&imacr;, wife of Dh&rdotb;tar&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;ra, <ref target=pb214 type=pageref>214</ref>.

<p>Gandharvas, <ref target=pb17 type=pageref>17</ref>, <ref target=pb23 type=pageref>23</ref>, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>, <ref target=pb112 type=pageref>112</ref>, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>, n. <ref target=n339.3 type=noteref>3</ref>;
  <lb>dress of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>Ga&ndotb;eça, propitiated in the preliminaries of the drama, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>.

<p>Ga&nmacr;g&amacr;, river-goddess, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>, <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>.

<p>Ga&nmacr;g&amacr;dhara, author of the <hi>Ga&nmacr;gad&amacr;saprat&amacr;pavil&amacr;sa</hi>, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>.

<p>Garland, <hi>see</hi> <hi>V&imacr;th&imacr;</hi>.

<p>Garland of Fame, an allegorical character, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>.

<p>Garu&ddotb;a, <ref target=pb79 type=pageref>79</ref>, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>, <ref target=pb175 type=pageref>175</ref>, <ref target=pb179 type=pageref>179</ref>.

<p>G&amacr;trasevaka, in the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb108 type=pageref>108</ref>.

<p>Gau&ddotb;a, or Gau&ddotb;&imacr;, style, <ref target=pb202 type=pageref>202</ref>, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>.

<p>Gaur&imacr;, the goddess, <ref target=pb174 type=pageref>174</ref>, <ref target=pb175 type=pageref>175</ref>, <ref target=pb176 type=pageref>176</ref>, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>.

<p>Gautama, the <hi>Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka</hi> of Agnimitra, <ref target=pb148 type=pageref>148</ref>, <ref target=pb155 type=pageref>155</ref>.

<p>Gay, hero, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>.

<pb n=379 id=pb379 facs="f:379"><p>Gazelle, magic, in the R&amacr;ma legend, <ref target=pb221 type=pageref>221</ref>.

<p>Gedrosians, knew Greek drama, <ref target=pb59 type=pageref>59</ref>.

<p>Geldner, Prof. K., theory of dialogue hymns in Veda, <ref target=pb22 type=pageref>22</ref>, <ref target=pb23 type=pageref>23</ref>.

<p>General (<hi>sen&amacr;pati</hi>), exalted hero, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>.

<p>Gentleness, as an allegorical character, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>.

<p>Germ (<hi>b&imacr;ja</hi>), as an element of the plot, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>.

<p>Gesture, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>, n. <ref target=n338.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb364 type=pageref>364</ref>, <ref target=pb365 type=pageref>365</ref>, <ref target=pb367 type=pageref>367</ref>.

<p>Ghanaçy&amacr;ma, author of the <hi>&Amacr;nandamañjar&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>.

<p>Gha&tdotb;ik&amacr;çata, <hi>see</hi> K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a.

<p>Gha&tdotb;otkaca, son of Bh&imacr;ma and Hi&ddotb;imb&amacr;, <ref target=pb95 type=pageref>95</ref>, <ref target=pb106 type=pageref>106</ref>, <ref target=pb109 type=pageref>109</ref>, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>, <ref target=pb213 type=pageref>213</ref>.

<p>Goba&mdota;°, a character, <ref target=pb85 type=pageref>85</ref>;
  <lb>Pr&amacr;krit used by, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>.

<p>God&amacr;var&imacr;, river goddess, as a character, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>.

<p>Gods, as heroes of the <hi>&Ddotb;ima</hi>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>;
  <lb>in the <hi>Samavak&amacr;ra</hi>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>;
  <lb>dress of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>;
  <lb>characteristics of, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>.

<p>Goethe, views of, on K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>, <ref target=pb280 type=pageref>280</ref>.

<p>Goha, in the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb136 type=pageref>136</ref>.

<p>Gokulan&amacr;tha, author of the <hi>Am&rdotb;todaya</hi>, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>, n. <ref target=n253.3 type=noteref>3</ref>, <ref target=pb343 type=pageref>343</ref>.

<p>Good Conduct, as an allegorical character, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>.

<p>Gop&amacr;la, father of &Amacr;ryaka, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>.

<p>Gop&amacr;la, patron of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;amiçra, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>.

<p>Gop&imacr;n&amacr;tha Cakravartin, author of the <hi>Kautukasarvasva</hi>, <ref target=pb262 type=pageref>262</ref>.

<p>Gop&imacr;s, cowherdesses, loved by K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>, <ref target=pb274 type=pageref>274</ref>.

<p>Gor&imacr; &Imacr;sapa, a Mahomedan, <ref target=pb250 type=pageref>250</ref>.

<p>Graceful (<hi>kaiçik&imacr;</hi>) manner, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>, <ref target=pb349 type=pageref>349</ref>, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>.

<p>Graces, of the heroine, <ref target=pb310 type=pageref>310</ref>.

<p>Grammarians, evidence of, as to drama, <ref target=pb31 type=pageref>31</ref>&ndash;6.

<p>Grammatical, peculiarities, in Sanskrit, <ref target=pb85 type=pageref>85</ref>, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>;
  <lb>in Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>&ndash;9, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p>Grandeur, <ref target=pb195 type=pageref>195</ref>, <ref target=pb196 type=pageref>196</ref>.

<p>Great Dionysia, plays produced at, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>.

<p>Greece, absence in the main of female dramatists, <ref target=pb288 type=pageref>288</ref>.

<p>Greek astrology, known to K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>.

<p>Greek drama, compared with Indian, <ref target=pb276 type=pageref>276</ref>, <ref target=pb277 type=pageref>277</ref>, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>, n. <ref target=n279.2 type=noteref>2</ref>, <ref target=pb280 type=pageref>280</ref>, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>;
  <lb>origin of, <ref target=pb37 type=pageref>37</ref>&ndash;39;
  <lb>stage for, <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>.

<p>Greek influence on the Sanskrit drama, <ref target=pb57 type=pageref>57</ref>&ndash;68, <ref target=pb355 type=pageref>355</ref>, <ref target=pb356 type=pageref>356</ref>.

<p>Guards, present in the auditorium, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p>Guha, a forest chief, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>.

<p>Guha, son of Çiva, <ref target=pb170 type=pageref>170</ref>.

<p>Guhasena, of Valabh&imacr;, <ref target=pb275 type=pageref>275</ref>.

<p>Guhyakas, propitiated in the preliminaries, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>, n. <ref target=n339.3 type=noteref>3</ref>.

<p>Guildsmen, or rich merchants (<hi>çre&sdotb;&tdotb;hin</hi>), language of, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p>Gu&ndotb;abhara, epithet of Mahendravikramavarman, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>.

<p>Gu&ndotb;&amacr;&ddotb;hya, author of the <hi>B&rdotb;hatkath&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb52 type=pageref>52</ref>, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>.

<p>Guptas, dynasty, <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref>, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>;
  <lb>of Magadha, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.h>
<head>H</head>

<p>Hair, how worn on the stage, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>, <ref target=pb367 type=pageref>367</ref>.

<p>H&amacr;la, or S&amacr;tav&amacr;hana, <ref target=pb74 type=pageref>74</ref>, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>;
  <lb>refers to drama, <ref target=pb45 type=pageref>45</ref>, n. <ref target=n45.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>Hamartia, Aristotelian doctrine of, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>, n. <ref target=n279.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>Hamm&imacr;ra, a Mahomedan invader, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>, <ref target=pb250 type=pageref>250</ref>.

<p>Ha&ndota;savat&imacr;, a queen of Du&hdotb;&sdotb;anta, <ref target=pb158 type=pageref>158</ref>, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>.

<p>Hanumant, <ref target=pb63 type=pageref>63</ref>, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>, <ref target=pb113 type=pageref>113</ref>, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>, <ref target=pb227 type=pageref>227</ref>, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>.

<p>Happy ending, necessary in drama, <ref target=pb38 type=pageref>38</ref>, n. <ref target=n38.2 type=noteref>2</ref>, <ref target=pb140 type=pageref>140</ref>, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>, <ref target=pb354 type=pageref>354</ref>.

<p>Hara, the god, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>, <ref target=pb241 type=pageref>241</ref>.

<p>Haradatta, on <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi>, <ref target=pb34 type=pageref>34</ref>.

<p>Harem life, effect on drama, <ref target=pb65 type=pageref>65</ref>, <ref target=pb280 type=pageref>280</ref>.

<p>Haribrahmadeva, of Raypur, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.

<p>H&amacr;ricandra, a poet, <ref target=pb91 type=pageref>91</ref>.

<p>Harihara, author of the <hi>Bhart&rdotb;harinirveda</hi>, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>.

<p>Harihara, brother of M&amacr;dhava, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>.

<p>Hariçcandra, tale of, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>.

<p>Harisi&ndota;ha, of Simraon, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>.

<p>Harlequin, origin of the character of the, <ref target=pb39 type=pageref>39</ref>.

<p>Har&sdotb;a, dramatist, of Kanyakubja (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 606&ndash;48), <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>, <ref target=pb85 type=pageref>85</ref>, <ref target=pb103 type=pageref>103</ref>, <ref target=pb155 type=pageref>155</ref>, <ref target=pb170 type=pageref>170</ref>&ndash;81, <ref target=pb204 type=pageref>204</ref>, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref>, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>, <ref target=pb355 type=pageref>355</ref>, n. <ref target=n355.3 type=noteref>3</ref>, <ref target=pb368 type=pageref>368</ref>.

<p>Har&sdotb;a, Candella, king of Jej&amacr;kabhukti, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref>.

<p>Harshness, as an allegorical character, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.

<p>Hastigiri, lord of, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>.

<p>Haughty, hero, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>;
  <lb>enemy of the hero, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>, <ref target=pb308 type=pageref>308</ref>.

<p>Hemacandra, Jain author, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>, <ref target=pb243 type=pageref>243</ref>, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>, <ref target=pb273 type=pageref>273</ref>, <ref target=pb275 type=pageref>275</ref>.

<p>Hemak&umacr;&tdotb;a, place of abode of M&amacr;r&imacr;ca, <ref target=pb154 type=pageref>154</ref>.

<p>Hem&amacr;&nmacr;gada, a Vidy&amacr;dhara, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>.

<p>Hem&amacr;&nmacr;g&imacr;, a heroine, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p><hi>Herakleidai</hi>, of Euripides, known in India, <ref target=pb59 type=pageref>59</ref>.

<p>Heresy, as a character, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p>Heretics, parodied in the <hi>Prahasana</hi>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>;
  <lb>excluded from spectacles, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p>Hero, in Sanskrit drama, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>&ndash;7, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>;
  <lb>should be on stage during each Act, <ref target=pb140 type=pageref>140</ref>, <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>;
  <lb>appropriate to several types of drama, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>&ndash;51.

<p>Heroic comedy, see <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi> and <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>.

<p>Heroic (<hi>v&imacr;ra</hi>) sentiment, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>;
  <lb><pb n=380 id=pb380 facs="f:380">metre and style appropriate to, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p>Heroine, in New Comedy, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>;
  <lb>in Sanskrit drama, <ref target=pb308 type=pageref>308</ref>&ndash;10;
  <lb>in different types of play, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>&ndash;8, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p>Heroism, <ref target=pb165 type=pageref>165</ref>, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>, <ref target=pb177 type=pageref>177</ref>, <ref target=pb195 type=pageref>195</ref>, <ref target=pb211 type=pageref>211</ref>, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>.

<p>Hertel, Prof. J., theory of the origin of the drama, <ref target=pb16 type=pageref>16</ref>&ndash;18.

<p>Hetaera drama, Buddhist, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>, <ref target=pb85 type=pageref>85</ref>.

<p>Hetaerae, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>, <ref target=pb133 type=pageref>133</ref>, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>;
  <lb>form of names of, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>.

<p>Hi&ddotb;imb&amacr;, wife of Bh&imacr;ma, <ref target=pb95 type=pageref>95</ref>, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref>, <ref target=pb106 type=pageref>106</ref>, <ref target=pb109 type=pageref>109</ref>, <ref target=pb213 type=pageref>213</ref>.

<p>Hillebrandt, Prof. A., view of origin of drama, <ref target=pb25 type=pageref>25</ref>, <ref target=pb35 type=pageref>35</ref>, <ref target=pb36 type=pageref>36</ref>, n. <ref target=n36.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb39 type=pageref>39</ref>, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>, <ref target=pb50 type=pageref>50</ref>, <ref target=pb51 type=pageref>51</ref>, <ref target=pb52 type=pageref>52</ref>, <ref target=pb53 type=pageref>53</ref>.

<p>Hindi, vernacular drama in, <ref target=pb243 type=pageref>243</ref>.

<p>Hindu revival under the Guptas, <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref>.

<p><hi>Hippolytos</hi>, of Euripides, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>, n. <ref target=n279.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>Historical drama, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>&ndash;51.

<p><corr sic="Hiuen Tsang">Hiuan-Tsang</corr>, <ref target=pb170 type=pageref>170</ref>, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>.

<p>Hoernle, Dr. A. F. R., theory as to identity of Vikram&amacr;ditya, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>.

<p>Holi festival, <ref target=pb41 type=pageref>41</ref>.

<p>Horrible, descriptions of the, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>, <ref target=pb223 type=pageref>223</ref>.

<p>Horror, sentiment of, <ref target=pb319 type=pageref>319</ref>, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>, <ref target=pb324 type=pageref>324</ref>, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>;
  <lb>metre and style appropriate to, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p>Horse sacrifice, ritual abuse in, <ref target=pb25 type=pageref>25</ref>;
  <lb>of Agnimitra and Samudragupta, <ref target=pb149 type=pageref>149</ref>.

<p>Hultzsch, Prof. E., on date of Mur&amacr;ri, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>.

<p>Human sacrifice, as motif, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>.

<p>Humorous speech (<hi>vy&amacr;h&amacr;ra</hi>), <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>.

<p>Humour, <ref target=pb136 type=pageref>136</ref>, <ref target=pb159 type=pageref>159</ref>, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>, <ref target=pb177 type=pageref>177</ref>, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>, <ref target=pb211 type=pageref>211</ref>.

<p>H&umacr;&ndotb;as, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>, <ref target=pb145 type=pageref>145</ref>, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>.

<p>Hunters, speech of, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>.

<p>Hunting, miseries of, <ref target=pb152 type=pageref>152</ref>, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>.

<p>Huth, G., views on date of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb145 type=pageref>145</ref>, n. <ref target=n145.1 type=noteref>1</ref>;
  <lb>on order of his poems, <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.i>
<head>I</head>

<p>Iason, actor, <ref target=pb59 type=pageref>59</ref>.

<p>Idealism of Sanskrit drama, <ref target=pb276 type=pageref>276</ref>.

<p>Illuminator (<hi>d&imacr;paka</hi>), a figure of speech, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p>Imitation, of Açvagho&sdotb;a (<hi>Buddhacarita</hi>, xiii. <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref>), by Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb118 type=pageref>118</ref>.
  <lb>of Bh&amacr;sa, by K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb124 type=pageref>124</ref>&ndash;6;
  <lb>  by Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb187 type=pageref>187</ref>, n. <ref target=n187.2 type=noteref>2</ref>;
  <lb>  in the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb131 type=pageref>131</ref>, <ref target=pb140 type=pageref>140</ref>.
  <lb>of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, by Har&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb175 type=pageref>175</ref>, <ref target=pb176 type=pageref>176</ref>;
  <lb>  by Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>.
  <lb>of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> (wrongly questioned in JRAS., 1923, p. 592), by Viç&amacr;khadatta, <ref target=pb208 type=pageref>208</ref>.

<p>Incident (<hi>prakar&imacr;</hi>), <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>.

<p>Incoherent talk (<hi>asatpral&amacr;pa</hi>), <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>.

<p>Indian philosophy, the product of the Brahmins, <ref target=pb276 type=pageref>276</ref>.

<p>Individuality, of characterization, not aimed at in Sanskrit drama, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>.

<p>Indra, dialogues introducing, <ref target=pb14 type=pageref>14</ref>, <ref target=pb15 type=pageref>15</ref>, <ref target=pb19 type=pageref>19</ref>;
  <lb>monologue of drunken, <ref target=pb18 type=pageref>18</ref>, <ref target=pb19 type=pageref>19</ref>;
  <lb>referred to, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>.

<p>Indra&apos;s banner, origin of drama in festival of, <ref target=pb41 type=pageref>41</ref>, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>.

<p>Indra III, R&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;rak&umacr;&tdotb;a, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref>.

<p>Infinitive, form of, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>.

<p>Internal junctures, see <hi>Antarasandhi</hi>.

<p>Interval of time, between Acts, <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>.

<p>Intoxication (<hi>mada</hi>), as a dramatic motif, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>.

<p>Introduction (<hi>&amacr;mukha</hi>), <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>.

<p>Invention of the poet, when allowed, <ref target=pb277 type=pageref>277</ref>, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>, <ref target=pb349 type=pageref>349</ref>.

<p>Ionian, equivalent to Greek, and also used more widely, <ref target=pb61 type=pageref>61</ref>.

<p>Ir&amacr;vat&imacr;, a queen, in the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi>, <ref target=pb148 type=pageref>148</ref>, <ref target=pb149 type=pageref>149</ref>, <ref target=pb155 type=pageref>155</ref>, <ref target=pb157 type=pageref>157</ref>.

<p>Irony, in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb119 type=pageref>119</ref>;
  <lb>in Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>, n. <ref target=n192.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb194 type=pageref>194</ref>.

<p>Irregularities of Sanskrit, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb85 type=pageref>85</ref>, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>;
  <lb>in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb120 type=pageref>120</ref>, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p>&Imacr;çvarasena, an &Amacr;bh&imacr;ra prince, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>.

<p>I-Tsing, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.j>
<head>J</head>

<p>Jagad&imacr;çvara, author of the <hi>H&amacr;sy&amacr;r&ndotb;ava</hi>, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>, <ref target=pb262 type=pageref>262</ref>.

<p>Jagajjyotirmalla, <hi>Haragaur&imacr;viv&amacr;ha</hi> by, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>, n. <ref target=n76.2 type=noteref>2</ref>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>.

<p>Jagann&amacr;tha, writer on poetics, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>.

<p>Jain M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr;, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>.

<p>Jaina allegorical drama, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>&ndash;6.

<p>Jainism, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>&ndash;6.

<p>Jains, and drama, <ref target=pb45 type=pageref>45</ref>, <ref target=pb46 type=pageref>46</ref>, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>&ndash;6, <ref target=pb286 type=pageref>286</ref>.

<p>J&amacr;mbavant, a bear, <ref target=pb227 type=pageref>227</ref>, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>.

<p>Janaka, of Videha, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>, <ref target=pb202 type=pageref>202</ref>, <ref target=pb223 type=pageref>223</ref>, <ref target=pb227 type=pageref>227</ref>, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref>.

<p>Ja&nmacr;gamas, criticism of the, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p>Jantuketu, a doctor, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>.

<p>Jarta, victory of, over H&umacr;&ndotb;as, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>.

<p>Ja&tdotb;&amacr;yu, a vulture, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>, <ref target=pb194 type=pageref>194</ref>, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>.

<p>J&amacr;t&umacr;kar&ndotb;&imacr;, mother of Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb186 type=pageref>186</ref>.

<p>Javan drama, <ref target=pb57 type=pageref>57</ref>.

<p>Jayadeva, author of the <hi>G&imacr;tagovinda</hi>, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref>.

<p>Jayadeva, author of the <hi>Prasannar&amacr;ghava</hi>, <ref target=pb226 type=pageref>226</ref>, <ref target=pb242 type=pageref>242</ref>, <ref target=pb244 type=pageref>244</ref>&ndash;6, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref>, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>.

<p>Jayadratha, of Sindhu, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref>, <ref target=pb213 type=pageref>213</ref>, <ref target=pb215 type=pageref>215</ref>.

<p>Jayakeçin, the <corr sic="Kar&ndotb;&amacr;ta">Kar&ndotb;&amacr;&tdotb;a</corr>, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>.

<p>Jayantasi&ndota;ha, son of Vastup&amacr;la, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>.

<p>Jayaprabha S&umacr;ri, teacher of R&amacr;mabhadra Muni, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>.

<p>Jayasi&ndota;ha S&umacr;ri, author of the <hi>Hamm&imacr;ramadamardana</hi>, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>&ndash;50.

<p>Jayatala, king of Mew&amacr;r, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>.

<p>Jayataladev&imacr;, wife of V&imacr;radhavala, <ref target=pb250 type=pageref>250</ref>.

<p>Jay&amacr;p&imacr;&ddotb;a (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 779&ndash;813), of Kashmir, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>, <ref target=pb368 type=pageref>368</ref>.

<p>Jester, see <hi>Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka</hi>.

<p>Jh&amacr;&mdota;k&imacr;s, of Bombay and Mathur&amacr;, <ref target=pb33 type=pageref>33</ref>.

<pb n=381 id=pb381 facs="f:381"><p>J&imacr;m&umacr;tav&amacr;hana, hero of the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi>, <ref target=pb174 type=pageref>174</ref>, <ref target=pb175 type=pageref>175</ref>, <ref target=pb177 type=pageref>177</ref>, <ref target=pb179 type=pageref>179</ref>, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>.

<p>Jinama&ndotb;&ddotb;ana, author of the <hi>Kum&amacr;rap&amacr;laprabandha</hi>, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>.

<p><corr sic="J vasiddhi">J&imacr;vasiddhi</corr>, in the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, <ref target=pb205 type=pageref>205</ref>, <ref target=pb207 type=pageref>207</ref>.

<p>Jñ&amacr;nanidhi, teacher of Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb186 type=pageref>186</ref>.

<p>Jñ&amacr;nar&amacr;çi, a Bh&amacr;gavata, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p>Jog&imacr;m&amacr;r&amacr; cave, <ref target=pb54 type=pageref>54</ref>, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>.

<p>Jones, Sir William, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>.

<p>Judgement, as a character, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p>Juncture (<hi>sandhi</hi>), <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>&ndash;300, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>&ndash;51.

<p>Jyotir&imacr;çvara Kaviçekhara, author of the <hi>Dh&umacr;rtasam&amacr;gama</hi>, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.k>
<head>K</head>

<p>Kabandha, headless demon, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>.

<p>K&amacr;d&imacr;, or Kad&imacr;, M&imacr;lacchr&imacr;k&amacr;ra&apos;s preceptor, <ref target=pb250 type=pageref>250</ref>.

<p>Kaikey&imacr;, wife of Daçaratha, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>, <ref target=pb227 type=pageref>227</ref>, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>.

<p>Kaiya&tdotb;a, on the <hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi>, <ref target=pb33 type=pageref>33</ref>.

<p>Kalacuris, a royal house, <ref target=pb226 type=pageref>226</ref>, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>.

<p>Kalaha&ndota;sa, in the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>.

<p>Kalaka&ndotb;&tdotb;ha, friend of M&amacr;ruta, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>.

<p>K&amacr;lapriya, probably Mah&amacr;k&amacr;la, the deity of Ujjayin&imacr;, <ref target=pb186 type=pageref>186</ref>.

<p>Kalha&ndotb;a, historian, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>, <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>.

<p>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, dramatist, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>, <ref target=pb65 type=pageref>65</ref>, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>, <ref target=pb91 type=pageref>91</ref>, <ref target=pb93 type=pageref>93</ref>, <ref target=pb115 type=pageref>115</ref>, <ref target=pb120 type=pageref>120</ref>, <ref target=pb124 type=pageref>124</ref>&ndash;6, <ref target=pb127 type=pageref>127</ref>, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>, <ref target=pb139 type=pageref>139</ref>, <ref target=pb143 type=pageref>143</ref>&ndash;67, <ref target=pb196 type=pageref>196</ref>, <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref>, <ref target=pb243 type=pageref>243</ref>, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>, <ref target=pb275 type=pageref>275</ref>, <ref target=pb280 type=pageref>280</ref>, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>, <ref target=pb291 type=pageref>291</ref>, <ref target=pb292 type=pageref>292</ref>, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>, <ref target=pb309 type=pageref>309</ref>, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>, <ref target=pb343 type=pageref>343</ref>, n. <ref target=n343.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb352 type=pageref>352</ref>, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>, <ref target=pb355 type=pageref>355</ref>, n. <ref target=n355.3 type=noteref>3</ref>, <ref target=pb364 type=pageref>364</ref>.

<p>Kali&nmacr;ga, king, enemy of Vatsa, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>, <ref target=pb174 type=pageref>174</ref>.

<p>Kali&nmacr;gas, colour of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>Kaliñjarapati, Bh&imacr;ma&tdotb;a described as, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref>.

<p>Kaliph of Baghdad, <ref target=pb250 type=pageref>250</ref>.

<p>Kalivatsala, a licentious king, <ref target=pb262 type=pageref>262</ref>.

<p>K&amacr;liya, a demon foe of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>, <ref target=pb106 type=pageref>106</ref>.

<p>K&amacr;ma, worship of, <ref target=pb172 type=pageref>172</ref>.

<p>K&amacr;mandak&imacr;, in the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>, <ref target=pb187 type=pageref>187</ref>, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>, <ref target=pb361 type=pageref>361</ref>, <ref target=pb362 type=pageref>362</ref>.

<p>Kanakalat&amacr;, a heroine, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>.

<p>Kanakalekh&amacr;, a princess saved by Mantragupta, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>, n. <ref target=n193.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p>Kanarese words, found in a Greek comedy, <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref>, n. <ref target=n60.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p>K&amacr;ñcana Pa&ndotb;&ddotb;ita, author of the <hi>Dhana&mdota;jayavijaya</hi>, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>.

<p><corr sic="K&amacr;ñci">K&amacr;ñc&imacr;</corr>, described in the <hi>Mattavil&amacr;sa</hi>, <ref target=pb183 type=pageref>183</ref>.

<p>Kani&sdotb;ka, king, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>, <ref target=pb70 type=pageref>70</ref>, <ref target=pb72 type=pageref>72</ref>.

<p>Ka&ndota;sa, uncle of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb32 type=pageref>32</ref>, <ref target=pb33 type=pageref>33</ref>, <ref target=pb34 type=pageref>34</ref>, <ref target=pb35 type=pageref>35</ref>, <ref target=pb36 type=pageref>36</ref>, <ref target=pb37 type=pageref>37</ref>, <ref target=pb38 type=pageref>38</ref>, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>, <ref target=pb45 type=pageref>45</ref>, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>, <ref target=pb73 type=pageref>73</ref>, <ref target=pb98 type=pageref>98</ref>, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>, <ref target=pb116 type=pageref>116</ref>.

<p>Ka&ndotb;va, foster-father of Çakuntal&amacr;, <ref target=pb152 type=pageref>152</ref>, <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>.

<p>Kap&amacr;laku&ndotb;&ddotb;al&amacr;, a sorceress, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>.

<p>K&amacr;p&amacr;lika, in the <hi>Mitr&amacr;&ndotb;anda</hi>, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>;
  <lb>endeavours to sacrifice <hi>Madanamañjar&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref><corr sic=.></corr> n. <ref target=n193.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p>K&amacr;p&amacr;likas, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>.

<p>Kap&amacr;lin, in the <hi>Mattavil&amacr;sa</hi>, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>, <ref target=pb184 type=pageref>184</ref>.

<p>Kapittha, a monkey, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>.

<p>Kar&ndotb;a, ally of the Kauravas, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref>, <ref target=pb106 type=pageref>106</ref>, <ref target=pb115 type=pageref>115</ref>, <ref target=pb213 type=pageref>213</ref>, <ref target=pb214 type=pageref>214</ref>, <ref target=pb215 type=pageref>215</ref>.

<p>Kar&ndotb;a, king of Cedi, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>.

<p>Kar&ndotb;adeva Trailokyamalla, of A&ndotb;hilv&amacr;&ddotb;, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>.

<p>Kar&ndotb;ap&umacr;raka, slave of Vasantasen&amacr;, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>.

<p>Kar&ndotb;asundar&imacr;, a princess, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>.

<p>Kar&ndotb;&imacr;suta, text-book by, on gambling, <ref target=pb134 type=pageref>134</ref>.

<p>Karpa&tdotb;a, an authority on thieves&apos; practice, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>.

<p>Karp&umacr;ramañjar&imacr;, a princess, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>.

<p>K&amacr;rty&amacr;yan&imacr;, a deity, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>.

<p>K&amacr;çi, colour of people of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>K&amacr;ç&imacr;pati Kavir&amacr;ja, author of the <hi>Mukund&amacr;nanda</hi>, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>.

<p>K&amacr;çm&imacr;r&imacr;, recension of the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb154 type=pageref>154</ref>.

<p>Kashmir, dramatic exhibitions in, <ref target=pb371 type=pageref>371</ref>;
  <lb>pronunciation of Sanskrit in, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>;
  <lb>H&umacr;&ndotb;as in, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>.

<p>K&amacr;&tdotb;ayavema, commentator on K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>, <ref target=pb154 type=pageref>154</ref>.

<p>K&amacr;ty&amacr;yana, the grammarian, <ref target=pb31 type=pageref>31</ref>.

<p>Kaumud&imacr;, heroine of the <hi>Kaumud&imacr;mitr&amacr;&ndotb;anda</hi>, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>.

<p>Kau&ndotb;&ddotb;inya, in the <hi>Ç&amacr;riputraprakara&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb82 type=pageref>82</ref>.

<p>Kauravas, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>.

<p>Kauçaly&amacr;, mother of R&amacr;ma, <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>, <ref target=pb195 type=pageref>195</ref>.

<p>Kauç&amacr;mb&imacr;, scene of the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>.

<p>Kauçik&imacr;, in the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi>, <ref target=pb148 type=pageref>148</ref>, <ref target=pb155 type=pageref>155</ref>, <ref target=pb156 type=pageref>156</ref>, <ref target=pb162 type=pageref>162</ref>, <ref target=pb165 type=pageref>165</ref>, <ref target=pb308 type=pageref>308</ref>.

<p>Kavikar&ndotb;ap&umacr;ra, author of the <hi>Caitanyacandrodaya</hi>, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>, <ref target=pb85 type=pageref>85</ref>, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>.

<p>Kaviputra, or Kaviputrau, dramatists, <ref target=pb91 type=pageref>91</ref>, <ref target=pb127 type=pageref>127</ref>, <ref target=pb128 type=pageref>128</ref>, <ref target=pb147 type=pageref>147</ref>.

<p>Kavir&amacr;ja, an ancestor of R&amacr;jaçekhara, <ref target=pb231 type=pageref>231</ref>.

<p>K&amacr;vya, Sanskrit, <ref target=pb71 type=pageref>71</ref>, <ref target=pb75 type=pageref>75</ref>, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>;
  <lb>style, <ref target=pb115 type=pageref>115</ref>, <ref target=pb283 type=pageref>283</ref>, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>.

<p>Keepers of drink shops, speech of, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p>Keçava, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>.

<p>Keçin, a demon foe of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>.

<p>Key&umacr;ravar&sdotb;a, Yuvar&amacr;ja, of Tripur&imacr;, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>.

<p>Kh&amacr;ravela of Kali&nmacr;ga, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>.

<p>Kharpara Kh&amacr;na, a Mahomedan, <ref target=pb250 type=pageref>250</ref>.

<p>Khasas, a people, speech of, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>.

<p>K&imacr;caka, death of, <ref target=pb63 type=pageref>63</ref>, <ref target=pb97 type=pageref>97</ref>.

<p>Killing of animals forbidden by Kum&amacr;rap&amacr;la, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>.

<p>Kings, as patrons of literature, <ref target=pb286 type=pageref>286</ref>;
  <lb>of actors, <ref target=pb362 type=pageref>362</ref>;
  <lb>as heroes of the drama, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>Kir&amacr;tas, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>;
  <lb>colour of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>;
  <lb>speech of, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p>K&imacr;rtivarman, king of Jej&amacr;kabhukti, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>.

<p>Kol&amacr;halapura, city of uproar, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p>Komudagandha, a <hi>Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka</hi>, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>.

<pb n=382 id=pb382 facs="f:382"><p>Konow, Professor Sten, theory of origin of drama, <ref target=pb25 type=pageref>25</ref>, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>, <ref target=pb54 type=pageref>54</ref>;
  <lb>various views of, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>, <ref target=pb81 type=pageref>81</ref>, <ref target=pb92 type=pageref>92</ref>, <ref target=pb94 type=pageref>94</ref>, <ref target=pb95 type=pageref>95</ref>, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>, <ref target=pb130 type=pageref>130</ref>, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb204 type=pageref>204</ref>, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>.

<p>Kordax, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>, n. <ref target=n42.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>Korybantes, <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref>.

<p>Kosala, king, enemy of Vatsa, <ref target=pb172 type=pageref>172</ref>, <ref target=pb177 type=pageref>177</ref>, <ref target=pb178 type=pageref>178</ref>.

<p>Kosalas, a people, colour of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>Ko&tdotb;ili&nmacr;ga, Yuvar&amacr;ja of, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>.

<p>Kouretes, <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref>.

<p>K&rdotb;pa, ally of the Kauravas, <ref target=pb213 type=pageref>213</ref>, <ref target=pb214 type=pageref>214</ref>.

<p>K&rdotb;p&amacr;sundar&imacr;, a princess, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.

<p>K&rdotb;ç&amacr;çvins, followers of K&rdotb;ç&amacr;çva, <ref target=pb31 type=pageref>31</ref>.

<p>K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb17 type=pageref>17</ref>, <ref target=pb26 type=pageref>26</ref>, <ref target=pb32 type=pageref>32</ref>, <ref target=pb35 type=pageref>35</ref>, <ref target=pb36 type=pageref>36</ref>, <ref target=pb37 type=pageref>37</ref>, <ref target=pb38 type=pageref>38</ref>, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>, <ref target=pb41 type=pageref>41</ref>, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>, <ref target=pb45 type=pageref>45</ref>, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>, <ref target=pb50 type=pageref>50</ref>, <ref target=pb73 type=pageref>73</ref>, <ref target=pb83 type=pageref>83</ref>, <ref target=pb97 type=pageref>97</ref>, <ref target=pb98 type=pageref>98</ref>&ndash;100, <ref target=pb106 type=pageref>106</ref>, <ref target=pb107 type=pageref>107</ref>, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>, <ref target=pb130 type=pageref>130</ref>, <ref target=pb213 type=pageref>213</ref>, <ref target=pb215 type=pageref>215</ref>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref>, <ref target=pb274 type=pageref>274</ref>, <hi>and see</hi> V&amacr;sudeva <hi>and</hi> Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u.

<p>K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a Avadh&umacr;ta Gha&tdotb;ik&amacr;çata Mah&amacr;kavi, author of the <hi>Sarvavinodan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>.

<p>K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a Kavi, author of the <hi>Çarmi&sdotb;&tdotb;h&amacr;yay&amacr;ti</hi>, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>.

<p>K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;amachari, R., author of the <hi>V&amacr;santikasvapna</hi>, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>.

<p>K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;amiçra, author of the <hi>Prabodhacandrodaya</hi>, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>, <ref target=pb85 type=pageref>85</ref>, <ref target=pb112 type=pageref>112</ref>, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>&ndash;3, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>.

<p>K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;amiçra, author of the <hi>V&imacr;ravijaya</hi>, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>.

<p>K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a S&umacr;ri, father of Mah&amacr;deva, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>.

<p>Krakucchanda, a Buddha, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>.

<p>K&sdotb;atriya, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>, <ref target=pb81 type=pageref>81</ref>, <ref target=pb276 type=pageref>276</ref>;
  <lb>colour of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>;
  <lb>seats for, <ref target=pb359 type=pageref>359</ref>.

<p>K&sdotb;emendra, of Kashmir, <ref target=pb236 type=pageref>236</ref>, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb371 type=pageref>371</ref>.

<p>K&sdotb;em&imacr;çvara, or K&sdotb;emendra, dramatist, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref>&ndash;41.

<p>Kulaçekharavarman, author of the <hi>Tapat&imacr;sa&mdota;vara&ndotb;a</hi> and <hi>Subhadr&amacr;dhana&mdota;jaya</hi>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb371 type=pageref>371</ref>, n. <ref target=n371.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p>Kum&amacr;ra, the god, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>;
  <lb>grove of, <ref target=pb150 type=pageref>150</ref>.

<p>Kum&amacr;rad&amacr;sa of Ceylon, alleged connexion with K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb143 type=pageref>143</ref>.

<p>Kum&amacr;ragiri, king of Ko&ndotb;&ddotb;av&imacr;&ddotb;u, <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>.

<p>Kum&amacr;rap&amacr;la, Caulukya, king of Gujar&amacr;t, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>.

<p>Kum&amacr;ravih&amacr;ra, at Th&amacr;r&amacr;padra, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>.

<p>Kum&amacr;rila, alleged to be a teacher of Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb186 type=pageref>186</ref>.

<p>Kumbhakar&ndotb;a, son of R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>.

<p>Kumbh&imacr;laka, servant of Vasantasen&amacr;, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>.

<p>Kumudacandra, a Digambara teacher, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>.

<p>Kumudik&amacr;, a hetaera, <ref target=pb133 type=pageref>133</ref>.

<p>Kuntibhoja, a king, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>, <ref target=pb109 type=pageref>109</ref>.

<p>Kura&nmacr;g&imacr;, a princess, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>, <ref target=pb109 type=pageref>109</ref>.

<p>Kurus, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref>, <ref target=pb97 type=pageref>97</ref>, <ref target=pb106 type=pageref>106</ref>.

<p>Kuça, son of R&amacr;ma, <ref target=pb30 type=pageref>30</ref>, <ref target=pb31 type=pageref>31</ref>, <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>.

<p>Kuçalaka, a spy, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>.

<p>Ku&sdotb;ana, Ku&sdotb;&amacr;&ndotb;a, dynasty, <ref target=pb59 type=pageref>59</ref>.

<p>Kuvalay&amacr;, an actress, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>.

<p>Kuvalayam&amacr;l&amacr;, princess of Kuntala, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.l>
<head>L</head>

<p>Ladies, of the harem, where placed in the auditorium, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>;
  <lb><hi>see also</hi> Heroines <hi>and</hi> Hetaerae.

<p>Lagidai, rule of, in Alexandria, <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref>.

<p>Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a, brother of R&amacr;ma, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>, <ref target=pb115 type=pageref>115</ref>, <ref target=pb119 type=pageref>119</ref>, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>, <ref target=pb223 type=pageref>223</ref>, <ref target=pb226 type=pageref>226</ref>, <ref target=pb227 type=pageref>227</ref>, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>.

<p>Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a M&amacr;&ndotb;ikyadeva, patron of, author of the <hi>Kautukaratn&amacr;kara</hi>, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p>Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a S&umacr;ri, author of the <hi>&Ddotb;ill&imacr;s&amacr;mr&amacr;jya</hi>, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>.

<p>Lak&sdotb;m&imacr;, the goddess, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>, <ref target=pb274 type=pageref>274</ref>.

<p>Lak&sdotb;m&imacr;pati, a prince, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>.

<p>Laments, of women, permitted in the <hi>A&nmacr;ka</hi>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>.

<p>Language, of Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb85 type=pageref>85</ref>&ndash;9;
  <lb>Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb120 type=pageref>120</ref>&ndash;2;
  <lb><hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb140 type=pageref>140</ref>&ndash;2;
  <lb>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>;
  <lb>Har&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb181 type=pageref>181</ref>;
  <lb>Mahendravikramavarman, <ref target=pb185 type=pageref>185</ref>;
  <lb>Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>;
  <lb>Viç&amacr;khadatta, <ref target=pb211 type=pageref>211</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>;
  <lb>Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>;
  <lb>R&amacr;jaçekhara, <ref target=pb236 type=pageref>236</ref>.

<p>La&nmacr;k&amacr;, mythical home of R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, not Ceylon, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>, <ref target=pb194 type=pageref>194</ref>.

<p>L&amacr;&tdotb;a, use of Pr&amacr;krit in, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>.

<p>Lava, son of R&amacr;ma, <ref target=pb31 type=pageref>31</ref>, <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>, <ref target=pb194 type=pageref>194</ref>, <ref target=pb195 type=pageref>195</ref>, <ref target=pb223 type=pageref>223</ref>, <ref target=pb224 type=pageref>224</ref>.

<p>L&amacr;va&ndotb;yasi&ndota;ha, son of Teja&hdotb;p&amacr;la, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>.

<p>Legendary origin of the dramatic art, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb13 type=pageref>13</ref>;
  <lb>of the theory of drama, <ref target=pb290 type=pageref>290</ref>.

<p>Legends, altered in the drama, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>.

<p>Letter, as a dramatic motif, <ref target=pb63 type=pageref>63</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>.

<p>Lévi, Prof. S., <hi lang=fr>Théâtre indien</hi> of, <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref>;
  <lb>theory of origin of the drama, <ref target=pb15 type=pageref>15</ref>;
  <lb>views on the origin of the <hi>Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka</hi>, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>;
  <lb>the Çakas and the drama, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>&ndash;72;
  <lb>other references to, <ref target=pb128 type=pageref>128</ref>, <ref target=pb208 type=pageref>208</ref>.

<p>Life, lack of criticism on, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>, <ref target=pb195 type=pageref>195</ref>, <ref target=pb196 type=pageref>196</ref>, <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>, <ref target=pb280 type=pageref>280</ref>, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>, <ref target=pb354 type=pageref>354</ref>.

<p>Light-hearted, hero, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>.

<p>Lion throne, royal box, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p>Literary antecedents of, and influences on, the Sanskrit drama, <ref target=pb75 type=pageref>75</ref>&ndash;7.

<p>Literary drama, <ref target=pb56 type=pageref>56</ref>, <ref target=pb273 type=pageref>273</ref>.

<p>Lokan&amacr;tha Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a, author of the <hi>K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;&amacr;bhyudaya</hi>, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>.

<p>Lop&amacr;mudr&amacr;, legend of, <ref target=pb14 type=pageref>14</ref>, <ref target=pb19 type=pageref>19</ref>.

<p>Loss of memory, as a dramatic motif, <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>.

<p>Love, as a character, <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>.

<p>Love, as a dramatic motif, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>, <ref target=pb285 type=pageref>285</ref>, <ref target=pb286 type=pageref>286</ref>, <ref target=pb310 type=pageref>310</ref>;
  <lb>as basis of sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>, <ref target=pb324 type=pageref>324</ref>;
  <lb>in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb107 type=pageref>107</ref>;
  <lb><hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb130 type=pageref>130</ref>, <ref target=pb138 type=pageref>138</ref>;
  <lb>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb159 type=pageref>159</ref>;
  <lb>Candaka, <ref target=pb169 type=pageref>169</ref>;
  <lb>Har&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb180 type=pageref>180</ref>;
  <lb>Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb196 type=pageref>196</ref>, <ref target=pb198 type=pageref>198</ref>, <ref target=pb199 type=pageref>199</ref>;
  <lb>Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>;
  <lb>R&amacr;jaçekhara, <ref target=pb238 type=pageref>238</ref>.

<pb n=383 id=pb383 facs="f:383"><p>Lovers, kinds of men, and women, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>&ndash;9.

<p>Low moral character of actors, <ref target=pb55 type=pageref>55</ref>, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>.

<p>Loyal, hero, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>.

<p>Lüders, Prof. Heinrich, theory of origin of the drama, <ref target=pb33 type=pageref>33</ref>, <ref target=pb34 type=pageref>34</ref>, <ref target=pb35 type=pageref>35</ref>, <ref target=pb53 type=pageref>53</ref>, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref>, n. <ref target=n272.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>Lyric choruses, Aristotle&apos;s view as to, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>, n. <ref target=n337.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p>Lyric stanzas, in the drama, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>, <hi>and see</hi> Verse.


<div2 id=ix.en.m>
<head>M</head>

<p>Madana B&amacr;lasarasvat&imacr;, author of the <hi>P&amacr;rij&amacr;tamañjar&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>.

<p>Madanam&amacr;l&amacr;, a hetaera, <ref target=pb134 type=pageref>134</ref>.

<p>Madanamañjar&imacr;, and a K&amacr;p&amacr;lika, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>, n. <ref target=n193.2 type=noteref>2</ref>;
  <lb>a hetaera, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>.

<p>Madanavat&imacr;, a female character, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>.

<p>Madanik&amacr;, in the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb135 type=pageref>135</ref>.

<p>Madayantik&amacr;, in the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;dhava, author of the <hi>Subhadr&amacr;hara&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>, <ref target=pb357 type=pageref>357</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;dhava, hero of the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>, <ref target=pb139 type=pageref>139</ref>, <ref target=pb187 type=pageref>187</ref> ff., <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>, <ref target=pb308 type=pageref>308</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;dhavasena, a prince, <ref target=pb147 type=pageref>147</ref>.

<p>Madhuka, a seer, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>.

<p>Madhus&umacr;dana, redactor of the <hi>Mah&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref>, n. <ref target=n271.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref>.

<p>Madhyama, in the <hi>Madhyamavy&amacr;yoga</hi>, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref>.

<p>Madness, of Pur&umacr;ravas, as a dramatic motif, <ref target=pb150 type=pageref>150</ref>.

<p>Magadhavat&imacr;, a hetaera, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;gha, poet (date, Jacobi, SBAW., 1923, p. 214), <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>.

<p>Magic, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>.

<p>Magic arts, in the <hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb172 type=pageref>172</ref>, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>;
  <lb>in the <hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb174 type=pageref>174</ref>;
  <lb>in the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi>, <ref target=pb175 type=pageref>175</ref>.

<p>Magic gazelle, in the R&amacr;ma legend, <ref target=pb221 type=pageref>221</ref>.

<p>Magic ring, conferring invisibility, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>, <ref target=pb112 type=pageref>112</ref>.

<p>Magicians, tricks of, <ref target=pb112 type=pageref>112</ref>, <ref target=pb172 type=pageref>172</ref>, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>, <ref target=pb176 type=pageref>176</ref>, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>.

<p>Mah&amacr;deva, author of the <hi>Adbhutadarpa&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>.

<p>Mah&amacr;deva, father of Jayadeva, <ref target=pb244 type=pageref>244</ref>.

<p>Mah&amacr;k&amacr;la, deity of Ujjayin&imacr;, <ref target=pb186 type=pageref>186</ref>.

<p>Mah&amacr;kavi, ancestor of Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb186 type=pageref>186</ref>.

<p>Mah&amacr;nindaka, a holy man, <ref target=pb262 type=pageref>262</ref>.

<p>Mah&amacr;r&amacr;ja Bh&amacr;skaradatta, father of Viç&amacr;khadatta, <ref target=pb204 type=pageref>204</ref>.

<p>Mah&amacr;r&amacr;&ndotb;a Meru, of Raypur, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr; lyric, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>.

<p>Mah&amacr;sena, Pradyota, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>, <ref target=pb130 type=pageref>130</ref>.

<p>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;ra, speech of, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>;
  <lb>idol of, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>.

<p>Mah&amacr;vrata rite, relation of, to drama, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>, <ref target=pb24 type=pageref>24</ref>, <ref target=pb26 type=pageref>26</ref>, <ref target=pb37 type=pageref>37</ref>, <ref target=pb39 type=pageref>39</ref>, <ref target=pb45 type=pageref>45</ref>, <ref target=pb51 type=pageref>51</ref>, <ref target=pb73 type=pageref>73</ref>, <ref target=pb112 type=pageref>112</ref>.

<p>Mah&amacr;y&amacr;na school, <ref target=pb80 type=pageref>80</ref>;
  <lb>Greek influence on the, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>.

<p>Mah&amacr;y&amacr;trika, a comic astrologer, <ref target=pb262 type=pageref>262</ref>.

<p>Mahendrap&amacr;la, of Mahodaya, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>.

<p>Mahendravikramavarman, an author, <ref target=pb93 type=pageref>93</ref>, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>&ndash;5.

<p>Maheçvara, father of Ça&nmacr;karal&amacr;la, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.

<p>Mahiman Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a, writer on poetics, <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>, <ref target=pb322 type=pageref>322</ref>.

<p>Mah&imacr;p&amacr;la, of Mahodaya, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;hi&sdotb;as, colour of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;hi&sdotb;mat&imacr;, capital of the Kalacuris, <ref target=pb226 type=pageref>226</ref>.

<p>Mahomedan influence on decadence of Hindu drama, <ref target=pb242 type=pageref>242</ref>, <ref target=pb371 type=pageref>371</ref>.

<p>Maitreya, a character in the <hi>Kaumud&imacr;mitr&amacr;&ndotb;anda</hi>, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>.

<p>Maitreya, C&amacr;rudatta&apos;s <hi>Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka</hi>, <ref target=pb139 type=pageref>139</ref>.

<p>Makaranda, in the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>, <ref target=pb308 type=pageref>308</ref>, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>.

<p>Makaranda, friend of Mitr&amacr;&ndotb;anda, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;lat&imacr;, in the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>, <ref target=pb187 type=pageref>187</ref> ff., <ref target=pb308 type=pageref>308</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;lava era, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;, heroine of the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi>, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>, <ref target=pb63 type=pageref>63</ref>, <ref target=pb148 type=pageref>148</ref>, <ref target=pb149 type=pageref>149</ref>, <ref target=pb158 type=pageref>158</ref>, n. <ref target=n158.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb159 type=pageref>159</ref>, <ref target=pb165 type=pageref>165</ref>, <ref target=pb309 type=pageref>309</ref>.

<p>Malayaketu, in the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, <ref target=pb205 type=pageref>205</ref> f.

<p>Malayavat&imacr;, heroine of the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi>, <ref target=pb174 type=pageref>174</ref>, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>.

<p>Mallik&amacr;, heroine of the <hi>Mallik&amacr;m&amacr;ruta</hi>, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>.

<p>Mallin&amacr;tha, commentator on K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb145 type=pageref>145</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;lyavant, minister of R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>, <ref target=pb194 type=pageref>194</ref>, <ref target=pb227 type=pageref>227</ref>, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>.

<p>Mamma&tdotb;a, writer on poetics, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>, <ref target=pb295 type=pageref>295</ref>, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>, <ref target=pb324 type=pageref>324</ref>.

<p>Man about town, <ref target=pb285 type=pageref>285</ref>.

<p>Man of taste, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>, <ref target=pb368 type=pageref>368</ref>, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p>Mand&amacr;kin&imacr;, a magician, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>.

<p>Ma&ndotb;&ddotb;aleçvara Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a, father of M&amacr;dhava, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>.

<p>Mandara, Mount, <ref target=pb98 type=pageref>98</ref>.

<p>Mand&amacr;rik&amacr;, a friend of a <hi>Vi&tdotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>.

<p>Mand&amacr;rik&amacr;, a servant, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>.

<p>Mandasor Praçasti (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 473), imitates K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>.

<p>Mandodar&imacr;, wife of R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>.

<p>Ma&ndotb;ic&umacr;&ddotb;a, legend of, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>.

<p>Manifestation of affection (<hi>narmaspho&tdotb;a</hi>), <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p>Ma&ndotb;ika, author of the <hi>Bhairav&amacr;nanda</hi>, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>.

<p>Ma&nmacr;kha, poet, <ref target=pb75 type=pageref>75</ref>, n. <ref target=n75.3 type=noteref>3</ref>, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>.

<p>Manners or styles (<hi>v&rdotb;ttis</hi>), <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>;
  <lb>in relation to types of dramas, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>&ndash;51.

<p>Manoram&amacr;, an attendant in the <hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb174 type=pageref>174</ref>, <ref target=pb362 type=pageref>362</ref>.

<p>Manovat&imacr;, acts part of Rambh&amacr;, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>.

<p>Manthar&amacr;, a slave woman, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>, <ref target=pb227 type=pageref>227</ref>, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>.

<p>Mantragupta, and Kanakalekh&amacr;, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>, n. <ref target=n193.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p>Manu, censures actors, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;ra, enemy of the Buddha, <ref target=pb180 type=pageref>180</ref>, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;r&imacr;ca, in the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb126 type=pageref>126</ref>, <ref target=pb154 type=pageref>154</ref>, <ref target=pb158 type=pageref>158</ref>;
  <lb>in the R&amacr;ma legend, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref>.

<pb n=384 id=pb384 facs="f:384"><p>M&amacr;rka&ndotb;&ddotb;eya, Pr&amacr;krit grammarian, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p>Marriage, celebrated by painting scene of it, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;ruta, hero of the <hi>Mallik&amacr;m&amacr;ruta</hi>, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>.

<p>Maruts and Indra, dialogue of, <ref target=pb14 type=pageref>14</ref>, <ref target=pb19 type=pageref>19</ref>, <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;rw&amacr;r, use of Apabhra&ndota;ça in, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>.

<p>Masks, possible use of, <ref target=pb365 type=pageref>365</ref>, n. <ref target=n365.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;tali, charioteer of Indra, <ref target=pb154 type=pageref>154</ref>, <ref target=pb157 type=pageref>157</ref>, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>.

<p>Mata&nmacr;ga, enemy of J&imacr;m&umacr;tav&amacr;hana, <ref target=pb178 type=pageref>178</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;thura, in the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb135 type=pageref>135</ref>.

<p>Mathur&amacr;, as home of drama, <ref target=pb41 type=pageref>41</ref>, <ref target=pb70 type=pageref>70</ref>, <ref target=pb74 type=pageref>74</ref>.

<p>Mathur&amacr;d&amacr;sa, author of the <hi>V&rdotb;&sdotb;abh&amacr;nuj&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;t&rdotb;gupta, a poet, <ref target=pb291 type=pageref>291</ref>, n. <ref target=n291.2 type=noteref>2</ref>, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>, <ref target=pb315 type=pageref>315</ref>, n. <ref target=n315.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;trar&amacr;ja, <hi>see</hi> Ana&nmacr;gahar&sdotb;a.

<p><hi>Matrona</hi>, of Greco-Roman drama, <ref target=pb65 type=pageref>65</ref>.

<p>Mattavil&amacr;sa, epithet of Mahendravikramavarman, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>.

<p>Matters unfit for stage representation, <ref target=pb300 type=pageref>300</ref>, <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>.

<p>Maudgaly&amacr;yana, a disciple of the Buddha, <ref target=pb81 type=pageref>81</ref>, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>.

<p>Maukhari king, Avantivarman, <ref target=pb204 type=pageref>204</ref>.

<p>Max Müller, theory of origin of the drama, <ref target=pb15 type=pageref>15</ref>.

<p>May-day merriment, in England, <ref target=pb41 type=pageref>41</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;yur&amacr;ja, author of <hi>Ud&amacr;ttar&amacr;ghava</hi>, <ref target=pb221 type=pageref>221</ref>, <ref target=pb223 type=pageref>223</ref>, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>.

<p>M&amacr;y&umacr;r&amacr;ja, variant of M&amacr;yur&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb221 type=pageref>221</ref>, n. <ref target=n221.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>Megasthenes, refers to the Kordax, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>, n. <ref target=n42.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>Meghan&amacr;da, son of R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>.

<p>Meghaprabh&amacr;c&amacr;rya, dramatist, <ref target=pb55 type=pageref>55</ref>, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>.

<p>Mekhal&amacr;, a maidservant, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>.

<p>Melanthos, legend of, <ref target=pb37 type=pageref>37</ref>, <ref target=pb38 type=pageref>38</ref>.

<p>Men, play women&apos;s parts, <ref target=pb36 type=pageref>36</ref>, <ref target=pb362 type=pageref>362</ref>.

<p>Menak&amacr;, mother of Çakuntal&amacr;, <ref target=pb152 type=pageref>152</ref>.

<p>Menander, comedy of, <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref>.

<p>Menander, king, conquests of, <ref target=pb59 type=pageref>59</ref>, <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref>.

<p>Mercenary soldiers, reflected in figure of <hi>Çak&amacr;ra</hi>, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>.

<p>Merchants, or guildsmen, speech of, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>;
  <lb>form of names, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>;
  <lb>as heroes of the <hi>Prakara&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>;
  <lb>the <hi>Prakara&ndotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>.

<p>Meru, Mah&amacr;r&amacr;&ndotb;a of Raypur, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.

<p>Message, as dramatic device, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>.

<p>Messenger, of hero, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>;
  <lb>of heroine, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>.

<p>Metre, influence of lyrics on, <ref target=pb77 type=pageref>77</ref>;
  <lb>of Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>, <ref target=pb90 type=pageref>90</ref>;
  <lb>Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>, <ref target=pb124 type=pageref>124</ref>;
  <lb><hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>;
  <lb>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>;
  <lb>Har&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb181 type=pageref>181</ref>;
  <lb>Mahendravikramavarman, <ref target=pb185 type=pageref>185</ref>;
  <lb>Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>;
  <lb>Viç&amacr;khadatta, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>;
  <lb>Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a <corr sic="N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;">N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</corr>, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>;
  <lb>R&amacr;jaçekhara, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>, <ref target=pb236 type=pageref>236</ref>, <ref target=pb238 type=pageref>238</ref>;
  <lb>K&sdotb;em&imacr;çvara, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>;
  <lb>Jayadeva, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>;
  <lb>K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;amiçra, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>;
  <lb>Udda&ndotb;&ddotb;in, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>;
  <lb>use of, in accord with sentiments, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>;
  <lb>in the <hi>Samavak&amacr;ra</hi>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>.

<p>Mew&amacr;r, defeat of Jayatala of, by the Mahomedans, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>, <ref target=pb250 type=pageref>250</ref>.

<p>Middle, for active, in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb120 type=pageref>120</ref>.

<p><hi>Midsummer Night&apos;s Dream</hi>, Sanskrit version of, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>.

<p>M&imacr;lacchr&imacr;k&amacr;ra, a Mahomedan, <ref target=pb250 type=pageref>250</ref>.

<p>Mildness (<hi>m&rdotb;dava</hi>), <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>.

<p><hi lang=la>Miles gloriosus</hi>, of Greco-Roman drama, <ref target=pb65 type=pageref>65</ref>;
  <lb>R&amacr;va&ndotb;a as a, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>.

<p>Military spectacle, see <hi>Vy&amacr;yoga</hi>.

<p>M&imacr;m&amacr;&ndota;s&amacr; view of sentiment, <ref target=pb316 type=pageref>316</ref>.

<p>Mime, Greek, alleged influence of, on Indian drama, <ref target=pb67 type=pageref>67</ref>, <ref target=pb68 type=pageref>68</ref>.

<p>Mimes, in India, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>, <ref target=pb57 type=pageref>57</ref>.

<p>Mimesis, Aristotelian doctrine of, <ref target=pb355 type=pageref>355</ref>.

<p>Mimetic art, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>.

<p>Mind, movements of, as related to the sentiments, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>.

<p>Minister, appropriate hero for a <hi>Prakara&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>;
  <lb>how addressed, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>;
  <lb>where placed in the auditorium, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p>Mirror of knowledge, an allegorical character, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>.

<p>Mirth (<hi>h&amacr;sa</hi>), as the basis of the comic sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p>Mise-en-scène, <ref target=pb364 type=pageref>364</ref>&ndash;9.

<p>Mitr&amacr;&ndotb;anda, hero of the <hi>Kaumud&imacr;mitr&amacr;&ndotb;anda</hi>, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>.

<p>Mitr&amacr;vasu, prince of the Siddhas, <ref target=pb174 type=pageref>174</ref>, <ref target=pb175 type=pageref>175</ref>, <ref target=pb178 type=pageref>178</ref>.

<p>Miy&amacr;&ndotb;alladev&imacr;, a princess, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>.

<p>Mlecchas, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>.

<p>Mohanad&amacr;sa, commentator on the <hi>Mah&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.

<p>M&omacr;kos, compared with <hi>Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka</hi>, <ref target=pb67 type=pageref>67</ref>.

<p>Mok&sdotb;&amacr;ditya, author of the <hi>Bh&imacr;mavikramavy&amacr;yoga</hi>, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>.

<p>Monkey, escape of, as a dramatic motif, <ref target=pb175 type=pageref>175</ref>.

<p>Monmohan Chakravarti, on date of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>.

<p>Monologue, see <hi>Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi>.

<p>Moon of Discrimination, an allegorical character, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>.

<p>M&rdotb;g&amacr;&nmacr;kalekh&amacr;, a hetaera, <ref target=pb262 type=pageref>262</ref>.

<p>M&rdotb;g&amacr;&nmacr;k&amacr;val&imacr;, a princess, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>.

<p>M&rdotb;gar&amacr;jalak&sdotb;man, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>.

<p>Mudgala hymn (RV. x. <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>), <ref target=pb18 type=pageref>18</ref>.

<p>Muhammad II, of Gujar&amacr;t, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>.

<p>Mukt&amacr;p&imacr;&ddotb;a Lalit&amacr;ditya, of Kashmir, defeats Yaçovarman of Kanyakubja, <ref target=pb186 type=pageref>186</ref>.

<p>M&umacr;lan&amacr;çaka, a barber, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>.

<p>Munisuvrata, temple of, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>.

<p>Muñja (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 974&ndash;95), a king, of Dh&amacr;r&amacr;, <ref target=pb292 type=pageref>292</ref>, <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref>.

<p>Mural&amacr;, a river, <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>.

<p>Mur&amacr;ri, author of the <hi>Anarghar&amacr;ghava</hi>, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>&ndash;31, <ref target=pb242 type=pageref>242</ref>, <ref target=pb244 type=pageref>244</ref>, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref>, <ref target=pb352 type=pageref>352</ref>.

<pb n=385 id=pb385 facs="f:385"><p>Mureçvara, a Çaiva ascetic, <ref target=pb262 type=pageref>262</ref>, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p>Mu&sdotb;&tdotb;ika, slain by K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>.

<p>Music, <ref target=pb16 type=pageref>16</ref>, <ref target=pb25 type=pageref>25</ref>, <ref target=pb44 type=pageref>44</ref>, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>, <ref target=pb50 type=pageref>50</ref>, <ref target=pb291 type=pageref>291</ref>, <ref target=pb292 type=pageref>292</ref>, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>, <ref target=pb352 type=pageref>352</ref>.

<p>Mystery of things, in Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb195 type=pageref>195</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.n>
<head>N</head>

<p>N&amacr;gas, pair of kings, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>;
  <lb>destroyed by Garu&ddotb;a, <ref target=pb174 type=pageref>174</ref>, <ref target=pb175 type=pageref>175</ref>, <ref target=pb179 type=pageref>179</ref>.

<p>N&amacr;g&imacr;s, how shown on the stage, <ref target=pb367 type=pageref>367</ref>.

<p>Nahap&amacr;na, a Western K&sdotb;atrapa, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>.

<p>Naiy&amacr;yika view of sentiment, <ref target=pb316 type=pageref>316</ref>.

<p>Nakhaku&tdotb;&tdotb;a, a theorist, <ref target=pb341 type=pageref>341</ref>.

<p>Nakula, a P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;ava, <ref target=pb214 type=pageref>214</ref>.

<p>Nala and Damayant&imacr;, <ref target=pb63 type=pageref>63</ref>, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>.

<p>Nalak&umacr;bara, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>.

<p>Nall&amacr; Kavi, author of the <hi>Ç&rdotb;&nmacr;g&amacr;rasarvasva</hi>, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>.

<p>Names of the Acts of a drama, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>;
  <lb>the drama, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>;
  <lb>the characters, <ref target=pb85 type=pageref>85</ref>, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>, <ref target=pb355 type=pageref>355</ref>.

<p>Nanda, the cowherd, <ref target=pb98 type=pageref>98</ref>.

<p>Nandana, in the <hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>.

<p>Nandas, a dynasty, <ref target=pb205 type=pageref>205</ref>.

<p>Nandikeçvara, <hi>Abhinayadarpa&ndotb;a</hi> by, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>, <ref target=pb367 type=pageref>367</ref>, n. <ref target=n367.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>N&amacr;rada, a sage, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>, <ref target=pb98 type=pageref>98</ref>, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>, <ref target=pb126 type=pageref>126</ref>, <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>.

<p>Narasi&ndota;ha, of Vijayanagara, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>.

<p>Narasi&ndota;ha II, of Orissa, <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref>.

<p>Narasi&ndota;ha, author of the <hi>Çivan&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;abhañjamahodaya</hi>, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>.

<p>N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, father of K&amacr;ñcana Pa&ndotb;&ddotb;ita, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>.

<p>N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb97 type=pageref>97</ref>, <ref target=pb98 type=pageref>98</ref>, <hi>and see</hi> K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a <hi>and</hi> Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u.

<p>Narendravardhana, father of Ana&nmacr;gahar&sdotb;a M&amacr;trar&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>.

<p>Narration, in lieu of action dialogue, <ref target=pb194 type=pageref>194</ref>.

<p>Narrative verses, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref>, <ref target=pb273 type=pageref>273</ref>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p>Nature, described in the drama, <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb138 type=pageref>138</ref>, <ref target=pb139 type=pageref>139</ref>;
  <lb>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb159 type=pageref>159</ref>;
  <lb>Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb195 type=pageref>195</ref>.

<p>Navam&amacr;lik&amacr;, in the <hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi>, <ref target=pb177 type=pageref>177</ref>.

<p>Nema Bh&amacr;rgava, a seer, <ref target=pb14 type=pageref>14</ref>.

<p>Neuter plural of <hi>a</hi>-nouns, in Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s and Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p>Neuter rôles, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>.

<p>New Comedy, alleged influence on Indian drama, <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref>&ndash;7.

<p>Nicula, alleged friend of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb145 type=pageref>145</ref>.

<p>N&imacr;laka&ndotb;&tdotb;ha, alters the last scene of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb135 type=pageref>135</ref>, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>, n. <ref target=n369.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p>N&imacr;laka&ndotb;&tdotb;ha, on the shadow play, <ref target=pb55 type=pageref>55</ref>, <ref target=pb56 type=pageref>56</ref>.

<p>Nipu&ndotb;aka, in the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, <ref target=pb205 type=pageref>205</ref>, <ref target=pb208 type=pageref>208</ref>;
  <lb>in the <hi>Hamm&imacr;ramadamardana</hi>, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>.

<p>Nipu&ndotb;ik&amacr;, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>.

<p>Nirbhaya, or Nirbhara, pupil of R&amacr;jaçekhara, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>.

<p>Noble, hero as always, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>.

<p>Nominative singular, of <hi>a</hi>-stems, in <hi>e</hi> and <hi>o</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>;
  <lb>in Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a  N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>.

<p>Northern Thrace, dramatic performance in, <ref target=pb38 type=pageref>38</ref>.

<p>Number, of Acts in a drama, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>&ndash;51;
  <lb>actors, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.o>
<head>O</head>

<p>Officers, of the Court, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>;
  <lb>where placed in the auditorium, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p>Officials, high, as exalted heroes, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>.

<p>Oldenberg, Prof. H<corr>.</corr>, theory of <hi>&Amacr;khy&amacr;na</hi>, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>&ndash;3.

<p>Omission of consonants in Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p>Opening (<hi>mukha</hi>), as a juncture, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>.

<p>Opera, <hi>Haragaur&imacr;viv&amacr;ha</hi>, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>, n. <ref target=n76.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p>Ornaments, worn by the actors, <ref target=pb367 type=pageref>367</ref>.

<p>Orodes of Parthia, Greek drama at Court of, <ref target=pb59 type=pageref>59</ref>.

<p>Outburst of affection (<hi>narmasphañja</hi>), <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p>Outvying (<hi>ati-</hi>, or <hi>adhi-bala</hi>), <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>.

<p>Oxus, H&umacr;&ndotb;as on the, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.p>
<head>P</head>

<p>Padmacandra, father of Yaçaçcandra, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>.

<p>Padmagupta, cited by Dhanika, <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref>.

<p>Padm&amacr;vat&imacr;, a heroine, <ref target=pb103 type=pageref>103</ref>, <ref target=pb107 type=pageref>107</ref>, <ref target=pb113 type=pageref>113</ref>, <ref target=pb125 type=pageref>125</ref>, <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>.

<p>Padm&amacr;vat&imacr;, place, <ref target=pb186 type=pageref>186</ref>.

<p>Pahlavas, colour of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>Painting, of actors&apos; faces, <ref target=pb37 type=pageref>37</ref>, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>P&amacr;laka, king of Ujjayin&imacr;, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>, <ref target=pb133 type=pageref>133</ref>.

<p>Palatal sibilants, produce strength of style, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p>P&amacr;li, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>.

<p>Pañc&amacr;la, music of speech of, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>.

<p>Pañc&amacr;la style, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>.

<p>Pañc&amacr;las, colour of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref><corr>.</corr>

<p>P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;avas, <ref target=pb95 type=pageref>95</ref>, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref>, <ref target=pb97 type=pageref>97</ref>, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.

<p>Panegyrists, where placed in the auditorium, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p>P&amacr;&ndotb;ini, the drama in, <ref target=pb31 type=pageref>31</ref>;
  <lb>his position in grammatical literature, <ref target=pb290 type=pageref>290</ref>.

<p>Pa&ndotb;is and Saram&amacr;, dialogue of, <ref target=pb14 type=pageref>14</ref>, <ref target=pb19 type=pageref>19</ref>, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>.

<p>Pantomime, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>, <ref target=pb275 type=pageref>275</ref>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>, and see <hi>Na&tdotb;a</hi>.

<p>P&amacr;p&amacr;c&amacr;ra, a bad king, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p>Paramardideva, of K&amacr;lañjara, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>.

<p>Paraçur&amacr;ma, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref>, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>, <ref target=pb194 type=pageref>194</ref>, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref>, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>, <ref target=pb319 type=pageref>319</ref>, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p>Parasite, in Greco-Roman drama, <ref target=pb65 type=pageref>65</ref>;
  <lb>in Indian drama, see <hi>Vi&tdotb;a</hi>.

<p>Pariy&amacr;tra, use of <hi>Bh&umacr;tabh&amacr;&sdotb;&amacr;</hi> in, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>.

<p>Paronomasia, <ref target=pb238 type=pageref>238</ref>.

<p>P&amacr;rçva, a T&imacr;rthakara, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>.

<p>Parthians, invaders of India, <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref>, <hi>and see</hi> Pahlava.

<p>Partnership, of actor and singer, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>.

<p>Parvateça, a king, <ref target=pb205 type=pageref>205</ref> f.

<pb n=386 id=pb386 facs="f:386"><p>P&amacr;rvat&imacr;, the goddess, <ref target=pb300 type=pageref>300</ref>, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>, <ref target=pb352 type=pageref>352</ref>;
  <lb>and the <hi>L&amacr;sya</hi> dance, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>.

<p>Paçume&ddotb;hra, a student, <ref target=pb227 type=pageref>227</ref>.

<p>P&amacr;çupata, a monk in the <hi>Mattavil&amacr;sa</hi>, <ref target=pb184 type=pageref>184</ref>.

<p>P&amacr;çupatas, a Çaiva sect, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>.

<p>Patañjali (<hi rend=asc>B.C.</hi> 150), the grammarian, <ref target=pb32 type=pageref>32</ref>&ndash;5, <ref target=pb52 type=pageref>52</ref>, <ref target=pb71 type=pageref>71</ref>, <ref target=pb72 type=pageref>72</ref>, <ref target=pb77 type=pageref>77</ref>, <ref target=pb98 type=pageref>98</ref>.

<p>Pathak, Prof. K. B., on date of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>.

<p>Pathos, in <hi><corr sic="M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ika">M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</corr></hi>, <ref target=pb136 type=pageref>136</ref>;
  <lb>in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb159 type=pageref>159</ref>, <ref target=pb161 type=pageref>161</ref>;
  <lb>in Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>, <ref target=pb195 type=pageref>195</ref>;
  <lb>as a sentiment, <ref target=pb319 type=pageref>319</ref>, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>, <ref target=pb324 type=pageref>324</ref>, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>;
  <lb>metre and style appropriate to, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p>Patience, as an allegorical character, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p>Pause (<hi>vimarça</hi>), the fourth juncture of the drama, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>.

<p>Persians, alleged to have knowledge of Greek tragedy, <ref target=pb59 type=pageref>59</ref>.

<p>Phallic dances, as sources of drama, <ref target=pb16 type=pageref>16</ref>.

<p>Phallic deities, <ref target=pb16 type=pageref>16</ref>, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>.

<p>Phallic orgies, <ref target=pb41 type=pageref>41</ref>.

<p>Philostratos, life of Apollonios of Tyana, <ref target=pb59 type=pageref>59</ref>.

<p>Physicians, where placed in the auditorium, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p>Picture, as dramatic motive, <hi>see</hi> Portrait.

<p>Piety, as an allegorical figure, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p>Pigments, mingling of, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>.

<p>Pillars, as marking off places in the auditorium, <ref target=pb359 type=pageref>359</ref>.

<p>Piç&amacr;cas, demons, hair of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>Pischel, Prof. Richard, theory of <hi>Itih&amacr;sa</hi>, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>;
  <lb>suggestion as to origin of the drama in the puppet play, <ref target=pb52 type=pageref>52</ref>&ndash;6;
  <lb>on the authorship of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb128 type=pageref>128</ref>;
  <lb>on Bh&amacr;sa and the <hi>Sth&amacr;paka</hi>, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>.

<p>Pity, as a character, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p>Plautus, <ref target=pb64 type=pageref>64</ref>.

<p>Play within a play, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>;
  <lb>in the <hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>;
  <lb>the <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi>, <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>;
  <lb>the <hi>B&amacr;lar&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>.

<p>Pleasantry (<hi>narman</hi>), as part of the graceful manner, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>.

<p>Pleasure, as connected with the primitive drama, <ref target=pb50 type=pageref>50</ref>;
  <lb>as a characteristic of the classical period of the Sanskrit drama, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>;
  <lb>supernatural character of aesthetic, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>, <ref target=pb319 type=pageref>319</ref>, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>, <ref target=pb321 type=pageref>321</ref>.

<p>Plot, <ref target=pb277 type=pageref>277</ref>, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>&ndash;305, <ref target=pb355 type=pageref>355</ref>.

<p>Plutarch, on drama in Parthia, <ref target=pb59 type=pageref>59</ref>.

<p>Poetics, <ref target=pb169 type=pageref>169</ref> and Part III.

<p>Poets, <corr sic=when>where</corr> placed in the auditorium, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p>Police officials (<hi>n&amacr;garaka</hi>), speech of, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p>Polity, as an allegorical character, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>.

<p>Portraits, as dramatic device, <ref target=pb154 type=pageref>154</ref>, <ref target=pb174 type=pageref>174</ref>, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>.

<p>Poverty, evils of, <ref target=pb137 type=pageref>137</ref>.

<p>P&rdotb;thu, father of Viç&amacr;khadatta, <ref target=pb204 type=pageref>204</ref>.

<p>P&rdotb;thv&imacr;dhara, on Pr&amacr;krits of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>.

<p>Practice of drama, influenced by theory, <ref target=pb352 type=pageref>352</ref>&ndash;4.

<p>Pradyota Mah&amacr;sena, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>, <ref target=pb130 type=pageref>130</ref>.

<p>Pradyumna, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>.

<p>Prahasta, ally of R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>.

<p>Prahl&amacr;danadeva, author of the <hi>P&amacr;rthapar&amacr;krama</hi>, <ref target=pb83 type=pageref>83</ref>, n. <ref target=n83.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>, <ref target=pb341 type=pageref>341</ref>, n. <ref target=n341.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>Pr&amacr;krits, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>, <ref target=pb46 type=pageref>46</ref>, <ref target=pb50 type=pageref>50</ref>, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>, <ref target=pb243 type=pageref>243</ref>, <ref target=pb273 type=pageref>273</ref>, <ref target=pb275 type=pageref>275</ref>, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>, <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>, <ref target=pb333 type=pageref>333</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>&ndash;8;
  <lb>evidence of, as to origin of drama, <ref target=pb72 type=pageref>72</ref>&ndash;5;
  <lb>of Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>&ndash;9;
  <lb>Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref><corr sic=",">;</corr>
  <lb><hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb140 type=pageref>140</ref>&ndash;2;
  <lb>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb161 type=pageref>161</ref>, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>;
  <lb>Har&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb181 type=pageref>181</ref>;
  <lb>Mahendravikramavarman, <ref target=pb185 type=pageref>185</ref>;
  <lb>Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>;
  <lb>Viç&amacr;khadatta, <ref target=pb211 type=pageref>211</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>;
  <lb>Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>;
  <lb>R&amacr;jaçekhara, <ref target=pb236 type=pageref>236</ref>;
  <lb>K&sdotb;em&imacr;çvara, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>;
  <lb>Yaça&hdotb;p&amacr;la, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>.

<p>Pr&amacr;krit drama. <ref target=pb65 type=pageref>65</ref>, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>&ndash;72, <ref target=pb236 type=pageref>236</ref>, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>;
  <lb>translation of Pr&amacr;krit passages into Sanskrit, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>.

<p>Pr&amacr;krit K&amacr;vya, later than Sanskrit K&amacr;vya, <ref target=pb71 type=pageref>71</ref>, <ref target=pb77 type=pageref>77</ref>.

<p>Pr&amacr;krit stanzas, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>.

<p>Pralamba, a demon, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>.

<p>Pramodaka, in the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, <ref target=pb206 type=pageref>206</ref>.

<p>Prat&amacr;parudra, of Warangal, <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref>.

<p>Prati&sdotb;&tdotb;h&amacr;na, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>.

<p>Preliminaries, of the drama, <ref target=pb51 type=pageref>51</ref>, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>&ndash;44, <ref target=pb368 type=pageref>368</ref>, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>.

<p>Previous birth, influence on ability to write poems, <ref target=pb288 type=pageref>288</ref>.

<p>Privation, as an aspect of love, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p>Priyadarçik&amacr;<corr sic=.>,</corr> a heroine, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>, <ref target=pb174 type=pageref>174</ref>.

<p>Priya&mdota;vad&amacr;, friend of Çakuntal&amacr;, <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>, <ref target=pb159 type=pageref>159</ref>.

<p>Problems of life, ignored in Sanskrit drama, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>, <ref target=pb195 type=pageref>195</ref>, <ref target=pb196 type=pageref>196</ref>, <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>, <ref target=pb280 type=pageref>280</ref>, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>, <ref target=pb354 type=pageref>354</ref>.

<p>Progression (<hi>pratimukha</hi>), as the second juncture, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>.

<p>Prologue, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>, <ref target=pb114 type=pageref>114</ref>, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref>, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>&ndash;44, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>.

<p>Pronominal forms, in Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s and Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s Pr&amacr;krits, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p>Propitiation (<hi>prarocan&amacr;</hi>), <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>.

<p>Prose, <ref target=pb23 type=pageref>23</ref>, <ref target=pb50 type=pageref>50</ref>, <ref target=pb51 type=pageref>51</ref>, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>, <ref target=pb73 type=pageref>73</ref>, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>, <ref target=pb202 type=pageref>202</ref>, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>;
  <lb>narrative style, <ref target=pb273 type=pageref>273</ref>;
  <lb>simple in the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>.

<p>Protagonist, compared to <hi>S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra</hi>, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>.

<p>Proverbial phrases, affected by Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb120 type=pageref>120</ref>.

<p>Proverbs, <ref target=pb211 type=pageref>211</ref>, <ref target=pb236 type=pageref>236</ref>.

<p>Public, dramas and, the, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>, <ref target=pb371 type=pageref>371</ref>.

<p>Pulindas, a people, colour of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>Pu&ndotb;yaketu, a character, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.

<p>Puppet play, relation to drama, <ref target=pb52 type=pageref>52</ref>, <ref target=pb53 type=pageref>53</ref>.

<p>Pur&umacr;ravas, a hero, <ref target=pb14 type=pageref>14</ref>, <ref target=pb22 type=pageref>22</ref>, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>, <ref target=pb149 type=pageref>149</ref>, <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>, <ref target=pb156 type=pageref>156</ref>, <ref target=pb157 type=pageref>157</ref>, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>.

<pb n=387 id=pb387 facs="f:387"><p>Puru&sdotb;amedha, <ref target=pb25 type=pageref>25</ref>.

<p>Puru&sdotb;ottama, name confused with that of Pur&umacr;ravas, <ref target=pb150 type=pageref>150</ref>;
  <lb>celebrated, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>.

<p>Pu&sdotb;paka, car, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>.

<p>Pu&sdotb;yagupta, described as a R&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;riya, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>.

<p><corr sic="Pu&sdotb;yamtia">Pu&sdotb;yamitra</corr>, a king, <ref target=pb149 type=pageref>149</ref>.

<p>P&umacr;tan&amacr;, demoness killed by K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.q>
<head>Q</head>

<p>Qualities, of words, theory of, <ref target=pb321 type=pageref>321</ref>, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>, <ref target=pb333 type=pageref>333</ref>, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>.

<p>Queen, character of the, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.ri>
<head>&Rdotb;</head>

<p>&Rdotb;&sdotb;abha, a T&imacr;rthakara, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>.

<p>&Rdotb;&sdotb;is, hypocritical objections of, to vice, <ref target=pb262 type=pageref>262</ref>.

<p>&Rdotb;&sdotb;yaç&rdotb;&nmacr;ga, tale of, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.r>
<head>R</head>

<p>Radanik&amacr;, servant of C&amacr;rudatta, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;dh&amacr;, beloved of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref>, <ref target=pb274 type=pageref>274</ref>.

<p>Rad&imacr;, M&imacr;lacchr&imacr;k&amacr;ra&apos;s preceptor, <ref target=pb250 type=pageref>250</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;ghavabha&tdotb;&tdotb;a, commentator on the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb154 type=pageref>154</ref>.

<p>Raghu, <hi>Digvijaya</hi> of, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;j&amacr;cala, <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;jar&amacr;ja I, of Tanjore, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>, n. <ref target=n251.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;jaçekhara, dramatist and critic, <ref target=pb52 type=pageref>52</ref>, <ref target=pb91 type=pageref>91</ref>, <ref target=pb103 type=pageref>103</ref>, <ref target=pb155 type=pageref>155</ref>, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>, <ref target=pb231 type=pageref>231</ref>&ndash;9, <ref target=pb242 type=pageref>242</ref>, <ref target=pb243 type=pageref>243</ref>, <ref target=pb244 type=pageref>244</ref>, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref>, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>, <ref target=pb288 type=pageref>288</ref>, <ref target=pb300 type=pageref>300</ref>, <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>, <ref target=pb341 type=pageref>341</ref>, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>, <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;jaçekhara, the younger, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;jasi&ndota;ha, <ref target=pb93 type=pageref>93</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;jendral&amacr;lamitra, referred to, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;jputs, R&amacr;japutras, language of, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa, hero of the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>, <ref target=pb205 type=pageref>205</ref> ff., <ref target=pb352 type=pageref>352</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;k&sdotb;asas, or Rak&sdotb;ases, demons, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>, <ref target=pb223 type=pageref>223</ref>, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>;
  <lb>dress of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;ma, <ref target=pb30 type=pageref>30</ref>, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>, <ref target=pb47 type=pageref>47</ref>, <ref target=pb63 type=pageref>63</ref>, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>, <ref target=pb116 type=pageref>116</ref>, <ref target=pb119 type=pageref>119</ref>, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>, <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>, <ref target=pb194 type=pageref>194</ref>, <ref target=pb195 type=pageref>195</ref>, <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>, <ref target=pb199 type=pageref>199</ref>, <ref target=pb223 type=pageref>223</ref>, <ref target=pb224 type=pageref>224</ref>, <ref target=pb227 type=pageref>227</ref>, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref>, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>, <ref target=pb308 type=pageref>308</ref>, <ref target=pb316 type=pageref>316</ref>, <ref target=pb317 type=pageref>317</ref>, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;ma, author of the <hi>Manmathonmathana</hi>, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;mabhadra D&imacr;k&sdotb;ita, author of the <hi>J&amacr;nak&imacr;pari&ndotb;aya</hi>, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>;
  <lb>the <hi>Ç&rdotb;&nmacr;g&amacr;ratilaka</hi>, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;mabhadra Muni, author of the <hi>Prabuddharauhi&ndotb;eya</hi>, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;macandra, dramatist, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;mak&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, author of the <hi>Gop&amacr;lakelicandrik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref>&ndash;4.

<p>R&amacr;m&amacr;nuja, philosopher, <ref target=pb274 type=pageref>274</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;mavarman, author of the <hi>Rukmi&ndotb;&imacr;pari&ndotb;aya</hi>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>.

<p>Rambh&amacr;, a nymph, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;meçvara, grandfather of Jyotir&imacr;çvara, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;mila, dramatist, <ref target=pb127 type=pageref>127</ref>, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>.

<p>Ram-fights, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>, <ref target=pb285 type=pageref>285</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;m-L&imacr;l&amacr; festival, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>.

<p>Ra&ndotb;ajambuka, a comic general, <ref target=pb262 type=pageref>262</ref>.

<p>Ra&ndotb;amalladeva, of Raypur, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.

<p>Ra&nmacr;gan&amacr;tha, commentator on the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>.

<p>Rantivarman, <hi>v. l.</hi>, for Avantivarman, <ref target=pb204 type=pageref>204</ref>.

<p>Ratnac&umacr;&ddotb;a, a Vidy&amacr;dhara, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>.

<p>Ratn&amacr;kara, a poet, <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>;
  <lb>perhaps imitated by Viç&amacr;khadatta, <ref target=pb204 type=pageref>204</ref>.

<p>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;, princess of Ceylon, <ref target=pb63 type=pageref>63</ref>, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>, <hi>and see</hi> S&amacr;garik&amacr;.

<p>Rauhi&ndotb;eya, hero of the <hi>Prabuddharauhi&ndotb;eya</hi>, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>.

<p>R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>, <ref target=pb52 type=pageref>52</ref>, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>, <ref target=pb116 type=pageref>116</ref>, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>, <ref target=pb194 type=pageref>194</ref>, <ref target=pb227 type=pageref>227</ref>, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>, <ref target=pb242 type=pageref>242</ref>, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref>, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p>Ravid&amacr;sa (before <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1812), <hi>Mithy&amacr;jñ&amacr;navi&ddotb;ambana</hi>, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>.

<p>Ravivarman (born <hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 1266), <hi>Pradyumn&amacr;bhyudaya</hi>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>.

<p>Reason, a character, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p>Recensions of the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi>, <ref target=pb147 type=pageref>147</ref>, n. <ref target=n147.2 type=noteref>2</ref>;
  <lb>of the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb154 type=pageref>154</ref>, <ref target=pb155 type=pageref>155</ref>;
  <lb>of the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>;
  <lb>of the <hi>Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</hi>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>, n. <ref target=n212.3 type=noteref>3</ref>.

<p>Recitation, as opposed to singing, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref>, <ref target=pb27 type=pageref>27</ref>, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>.

<p>Reciters, where placed in the auditorium, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p>Recognition, in Greek and Indian drama, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>, <ref target=pb63 type=pageref>63</ref>.

<p>Reed, banner of Indra, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>.

<p>Reich, Prof. E., theory of mime, <ref target=pb67 type=pageref>67</ref>, <ref target=pb68 type=pageref>68</ref>.

<p>Reinterpretation (<hi>avasyandita</hi>), <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>.

<p>Religion and the drama, <ref target=pb36 type=pageref>36</ref>&ndash;49, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>.

<p>Repartee (<hi>v&amacr;kkel&imacr;</hi>), <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>.

<p>Representation, of the drama, <ref target=pb364 type=pageref>364</ref>&ndash;9.

<p>Revata, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>.

<p>Rhyme, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref>.

<p>Ridgeway, Prof. Sir William, theory of origin of drama, <ref target=pb46 type=pageref>46</ref>, <ref target=pb47 type=pageref>47</ref>.

<p>Ring, motif of lost, in the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>, <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>;
  <lb>magic, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>, <ref target=pb112 type=pageref>112</ref>.

<p>Ritual cathartic cursing, and Greek comedy, <ref target=pb39 type=pageref>39</ref>, n. <ref target=n39.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p>Rogue, peculiarly appropriate to the <hi>Prakara&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>;
  <lb>the <hi>Prahasana</hi>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>.

<p>Rohasena, son of C&amacr;rudatta, <ref target=pb132 type=pageref>132</ref>, <ref target=pb137 type=pageref>137</ref>, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>.

<p>Rohi&ndotb;&imacr;, beloved of the Moon, <ref target=pb237 type=pageref>237</ref>.

<p>Roman borrowing from Greece, <ref target=pb68 type=pageref>68</ref>;
  <lb>drama, <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref>, <ref target=pb64 type=pageref>64</ref>.

<p>Royal Fortune, as an allegorical character, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>, <ref target=pb112 type=pageref>112</ref>, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.

<p><hi>Rudens</hi>, of Plautus, <ref target=pb63 type=pageref>63</ref>.

<pb n=388 id=pb388 facs="f:388"><p>Rudra, the god, <ref target=pb17 type=pageref>17</ref>, <hi>and see</hi> Çiva.

<p>Rudrad&amacr;man (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 151), use of Sanskrit in inscriptions of, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>.

<p>Rudrasena, use of word Bhadramukha by, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>, <ref target=pb71 type=pageref>71</ref>.

<p>Rudrasi&ndota;ha, a K&sdotb;atrapa, <ref target=pb94 type=pageref>94</ref>, <ref target=pb95 type=pageref>95</ref>.

<p>Rudra&tdotb;a, writer on poetics, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>.

<p>Rukmin, enemy of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>.

<p>Rukmi&ndotb;&imacr;, bride of K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>.

<p>Rukmi&ndotb;&imacr;, mother of Yaça&hdotb;p&amacr;la, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>.

<p>Ruma&ndotb;vant, a general, <ref target=pb108 type=pageref>108</ref>, <ref target=pb172 type=pageref>172</ref>, <ref target=pb177 type=pageref>177</ref>, <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>.

<p>R&umacr;pa <corr sic="Gosr&amacr;min">Gosv&amacr;min</corr>, author of the <hi>D&amacr;nakelikaumud&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>;
  <lb>of the <hi>Vidagdham&amacr;dhava</hi>, and the <hi>Lalitam&amacr;dhava</hi>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.sh>
<head>Ç</head>

<p>Çabaras, speech of, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>.

<p>Çail&amacr;lins, followers of Çil&amacr;lin, <ref target=pb31 type=pageref>31</ref>.

<p>Çaiva dramas, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>.

<p>Çaivas, criticism of, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p>Ç&amacr;kambhar&imacr;, in Sap&amacr;dalak&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>.

<p>Çakas, and Sanskrit drama, <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref>, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>&ndash;72;
  <lb>defeated by a Vikram&amacr;ditya, <ref target=pb143 type=pageref>143</ref>;
  <lb>mode of address in the drama, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>;
  <lb>speech of, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>;
  <lb>colour of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>Çaka&tdotb;a, a demon, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>.

<p>Çaka&tdotb;ad&amacr;sa, in the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, <ref target=pb205 type=pageref>205</ref> f.

<p>Çakti, female energy of Çiva, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>.

<p>Çakuntal&amacr;, an Apsaras, <ref target=pb152 type=pageref>152</ref>&ndash;5, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>.

<p>Ç&amacr;kyabhik&sdotb;u, in the <hi>Mattavil&amacr;sa</hi>, <ref target=pb183 type=pageref>183</ref>.

<p>Ç&amacr;liv&amacr;hana, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>, <hi>and see</hi> S&amacr;tav&amacr;hana.

<p>Çalya, king of the Madras, ally of the Kauravas, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref>, <ref target=pb115 type=pageref>115</ref>.

<p><corr sic="Çambh&umacr;ka">Çamb&umacr;ka</corr>, a Ç&umacr;dra, <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>.

<p>Ça&nmacr;kara, author of the <hi>Ç&amacr;rad&amacr;tilaka</hi>, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p>Ça&nmacr;kara, commentator on the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb154 type=pageref>154</ref>.

<p>Ça&nmacr;karal&amacr;la, author of the <hi>S&amacr;vitr&imacr;carita</hi>, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.

<p>Ça&nmacr;karavarman (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 883&ndash;902), of Kashmir, <ref target=pb291 type=pageref>291</ref>.

<p>Ça&nmacr;khac&umacr;&ddotb;a, a snake, <ref target=pb175 type=pageref>175</ref>, <ref target=pb177 type=pageref>177</ref>.

<p>Ça&nmacr;khadhara Kavir&amacr;ja, author of the <hi>La&tdotb;akamelaka</hi>, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>.

<p>Ça&nmacr;kuka, a writer on poetics, <ref target=pb291 type=pageref>291</ref>, <ref target=pb316 type=pageref>316</ref>.

<p>Ça&nmacr;kukar&ndotb;a, in the <hi>Abhi&sdotb;ekan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>.

<p>Ç&amacr;nt&amacr;, and &Rdotb;&sdotb;yaç&rdotb;&nmacr;ga, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>.

<p>Ç&amacr;radvata, a hermit, <ref target=pb159 type=pageref>159</ref>.

<p>Ç&amacr;riputra, <ref target=pb81 type=pageref>81</ref>, <ref target=pb82 type=pageref>82</ref>, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>.

<p>Ç&amacr;r&nmacr;garava, a hermit, <ref target=pb159 type=pageref>159</ref>.

<p>Çarvilaka, a thief in the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb64 type=pageref>64</ref>, <ref target=pb114 type=pageref>114</ref>, <ref target=pb131 type=pageref>131</ref>, <ref target=pb132 type=pageref>132</ref>, <ref target=pb135 type=pageref>135</ref>.

<p>Ç&amacr;takar&ndotb;is, use of Pr&amacr;krit by the, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>.

<p>Çat&amacr;nanda, friend of Janaka, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>, <ref target=pb227 type=pageref>227</ref>, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>.

<p>Çaunaka, views as to character of certain Vedic hymns, <ref target=pb15 type=pageref>15</ref>.

<p>Çau&sdotb;kala, envoy of R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb227 type=pageref>227</ref>.

<p>Çekharaka, the <hi>Vi&tdotb;a</hi> of J&imacr;m&umacr;tav&amacr;hana, <ref target=pb177 type=pageref>177</ref>.

<p>Çe&sdotb;ak&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, author of the <hi>Ka&ndota;savadha</hi>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>.

<p>Ç&imacr;ghraka, a spy, <ref target=pb250 type=pageref>250</ref>.

<p>Ç&imacr;lavat&imacr;, mother of R&amacr;jaçekhara, <ref target=pb231 type=pageref>231</ref>.

<p>Çi&nmacr;ga Bh&umacr;p&amacr;la, author of the <hi><corr sic="Rasasudh&amacr;r&ndotb;ava">Ras&amacr;r&ndotb;avasudh&amacr;kara</corr></hi>, <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>.

<p>Çiçup&amacr;la, of Cedi, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>.

<p>Çiva, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb17 type=pageref>17</ref>, <ref target=pb26 type=pageref>26</ref>, <ref target=pb41 type=pageref>41</ref>, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>, <ref target=pb47 type=pageref>47</ref>, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>, <ref target=pb183 type=pageref>183</ref>, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>, <ref target=pb227 type=pageref>227</ref>, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>, <ref target=pb241 type=pageref>241</ref>, <ref target=pb250 type=pageref>250</ref>, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref>, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>, <ref target=pb300 type=pageref>300</ref>, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>, <ref target=pb352 type=pageref>352</ref>.

<p>Çiv&amacr;, wife of Çiva, <ref target=pb241 type=pageref>241</ref>.

<p>Çivadatta, an &Amacr;bh&imacr;ra prince, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>.

<p>Çivasv&amacr;min, dramatist and poet, <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>.

<p>Çobh&amacr;vat&imacr;, capital of Ç&umacr;draka, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>.

<p>Çrama&ndotb;a, in the <hi>Ç&amacr;riputraprakara&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb82 type=pageref>82</ref>.

<p>Çrama&ndotb;aka, guise adopted by Ruma&ndotb;vant, <ref target=pb108 type=pageref>108</ref>.

<p>Çrava&ndotb;&amacr;, an ascetic, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>.

<p>Çre&ndotb;ika, of Magadha, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>.

<p>Çr&imacr;, celebrated, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>.

<p>Çr&imacr;ka&ndotb;&tdotb;ha N&imacr;laka&ndotb;&tdotb;ha, or Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb186 type=pageref>186</ref>.

<p>Çr&imacr;r&amacr;madeva, Vy&amacr;sa, dramatist, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.

<p>Çr&imacr;vardham&amacr;naka, father of Mur&amacr;ri, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>.

<p>Ç&umacr;dra, a seller of Soma, <ref target=pb24 type=pageref>24</ref>;
  <lb>struggle with Aryan in the Mah&amacr;vrata, <ref target=pb24 type=pageref>24</ref>.

<p>Ç&umacr;draka, alleged author of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>, <ref target=pb51 type=pageref>51</ref>, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>&ndash;42.

<p>Ç&umacr;dras, N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra shared by, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>;
  <lb>colour of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>;
  <lb>seats for, <ref target=pb359 type=pageref>359</ref>, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>;
  <lb>referred to, <ref target=pb37 type=pageref>37</ref>, <ref target=pb73 type=pageref>73</ref>, <ref target=pb98 type=pageref>98</ref>, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>.

<p>Çuka, a spy, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>.

<p>Çukra, in the <hi>Tripurad&amacr;ha</hi>, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>.

<p>Çuna&hdotb;çepa, tale of, <ref target=pb22 type=pageref>22</ref>;
  <lb>a student, <ref target=pb227 type=pageref>227</ref>.

<p>Çu&nmacr;ga dynasty, <ref target=pb149 type=pageref>149</ref>.

<p>Ç&umacr;ra, minister of Avantivarman, <ref target=pb204 type=pageref>204</ref>.

<p>Ç&umacr;rasenas, colour of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>Ç&umacr;rpa&ndotb;akh&amacr;, enemy of R&amacr;ma, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>, <ref target=pb194 type=pageref>194</ref>, <ref target=pb227 type=pageref>227</ref>, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.s>
<head>S</head>

<p>Sad&amacr;nanda, <hi><corr sic="Ve&ddotb;&amacr;ntas&amacr;ra">Ved&amacr;ntas&amacr;ra</corr></hi>, syncretism in, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>, n. <ref target=n318.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p>S&amacr;dhuhi&ndota;sika, a chief of police, <ref target=pb262 type=pageref>262</ref>.

<p>Saffron, in Kashmir, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>.

<p>S&amacr;gara, and the rivers, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>.

<p>S&amacr;garik&amacr;, <hi>alias</hi> of Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;, <ref target=pb172 type=pageref>172</ref>, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>, <ref target=pb304 type=pageref>304</ref>, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>.

<p>Sahadeva, a P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;ava, <ref target=pb213 type=pageref>213</ref>.

<p>Sajjalaka, a thief, <ref target=pb104 type=pageref>104</ref>.

<p>Salii, <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref>.

<p>S&amacr;mar&amacr;ja D&imacr;k&sdotb;ita, author of the <hi>Dh&umacr;rtanartaka</hi>, <ref target=pb262 type=pageref>262</ref>, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>;
  <lb>of the <hi>Çr&imacr;d&amacr;macarita</hi>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>.

<p>S&amacr;mba, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>.

<p>Sa&mdota;gr&amacr;masi&ndota;ha, a prince, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>.

<p>Samiddh&amacr;rthaka, in the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, <ref target=pb208 type=pageref>208</ref>.

<p>S&amacr;&mdota;k&rdotb;ty&amacr;yan&imacr;, confidante of V&amacr;savadatt&amacr;, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>, <ref target=pb175 type=pageref>175</ref>.

<pb n=389 id=pb389 facs="f:389"><p>Samp&amacr;ti, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>, <ref target=pb194 type=pageref>194</ref>.

<p>Sa&mdota;sth&amacr;na, in the <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi>, <ref target=pb104 type=pageref>104</ref>.

<p>Sa&mdota;sth&amacr;naka, in the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb131 type=pageref>131</ref>, <ref target=pb132 type=pageref>132</ref>, <ref target=pb133 type=pageref>133</ref>, <ref target=pb134 type=pageref>134</ref>, <ref target=pb136 type=pageref>136</ref>, <ref target=pb140 type=pageref>140</ref>.

<p>Sa&mdota;tu&sdotb;&tdotb;a, a <hi>Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka</hi>, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>.

<p>Samudragupta, Gupta Emperor, horse sacrifice of, <ref target=pb149 type=pageref>149</ref>.

<p>S&amacr;nchi, <hi>Kathakas</hi> on relief at, <ref target=pb30 type=pageref>30</ref>.

<p>Sañjaya, in the <hi>Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</hi>, <ref target=pb214 type=pageref>214</ref>, <ref target=pb217 type=pageref>217</ref>.

<p>Sanskrit, Çakas and, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>&ndash;72;
  <lb>of Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb85 type=pageref>85</ref>, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>;
    <lb rend="indent(1em)">K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>;
    <lb rend="indent(1em)">Har&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb181 type=pageref>181</ref>;
    <lb rend="indent(1em)">K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;amiçra, <ref target=pb243 type=pageref>243</ref>, <ref target=pb244 type=pageref>244</ref>;
    <lb rend="indent(1em)">Yaça&hdotb;p&amacr;la, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>;
  <lb>and Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb243 type=pageref>243</ref>, <ref target=pb244 type=pageref>244</ref>, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>, <ref target=pb273 type=pageref>273</ref>, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>, <ref target=pb283 type=pageref>283</ref>, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>, <ref target=pb333 type=pageref>333</ref>, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p>Saram&amacr; and the Pa&ndotb;is, legend of, <ref target=pb14 type=pageref>14</ref>, <ref target=pb19 type=pageref>19</ref>, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>.

<p>S&amacr;ra&ndotb;a, a spy, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>.

<p>S&amacr;rasvata school of grammarians, <ref target=pb145 type=pageref>145</ref>, n. <ref target=n145.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p>Saray&umacr;, river, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>.

<p>S&amacr;tav&amacr;hana, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>, <ref target=pb333 type=pageref>333</ref>, <hi>and see</hi> H&amacr;la.

<p>Satyabh&amacr;m&amacr;, in the K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a legend, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>.

<p>Saty&amacr;c&amacr;ra, a Brahmin, <ref target=pb262 type=pageref>262</ref>.

<p>Saud&amacr;min&imacr;, pupil of K&amacr;mandak&imacr;, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>.

<p>Saumilla, Somila, a dramatist, <ref target=pb91 type=pageref>91</ref>, <ref target=pb127 type=pageref>127</ref>, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>, <ref target=pb147 type=pageref>147</ref>.

<p>Sauv&imacr;ra, king, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>.

<p>S&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, commentator on the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi>, <ref target=pb15 type=pageref>15</ref>, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>.

<p>Scenes of introduction (<hi>arthopak&sdotb;epaka</hi>), <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>.

<p>Schroeder, Prof. L. von, theory of origins of drama, <ref target=pb16 type=pageref>16</ref>&ndash;21.

<p>Secular origin of the drama, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>&ndash;57.

<p>Self-sacrifice in Har&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb177 type=pageref>177</ref>, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>;
  <lb>in Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb195 type=pageref>195</ref>.

<p><hi>Senex</hi>, of Greco-Roman comedy, <ref target=pb65 type=pageref>65</ref>.

<p>Sense, figures of (<hi>arth&amacr;la&mdota;k&amacr;ra</hi>), <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p>Sentiment, produced by drama, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>&ndash;26, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>, <ref target=pb368 type=pageref>368</ref>;
  <lb>in relation to types of drama, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>&ndash;51;
  <lb>in connexion with the qualities of style, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>;
  <lb>blending of, <ref target=pb169 type=pageref>169</ref>.

<p>Servants (<hi>ce&tdotb;a</hi>), speech of, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>;
  <lb>kind of names of, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>.

<p><hi>Servus currens</hi>, of Greco-Roman drama, <ref target=pb65 type=pageref>65</ref>.

<p>Seven vices, banished, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.

<p>Shadow plays, and dramatic origins, <ref target=pb53 type=pageref>53</ref>&ndash;7; <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p>Shakespeare of India, K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa as, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>.

<p>Shameless, hero, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>.

<p>Shamsu-d-din, probable original of Hamm&imacr;ra, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>, n. <ref target=n249.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>Shaw, Bernard, stage directions in plays of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>Sibilants, treatment of, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>;
  <lb>in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>;
  <lb>in Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>.

<p>Siddh&amacr;rthaka, in the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, <ref target=pb205 type=pageref>205</ref>, <ref target=pb208 type=pageref>208</ref>.

<p>Siddhas, <ref target=pb178 type=pageref>178</ref>, <ref target=pb179 type=pageref>179</ref>.

<p>Similes, <ref target=pb330 type=pageref>330</ref>, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p>Simple, and causative verbal forms, confused, in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb120 type=pageref>120</ref>, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p>Simplicity of Indian theatrical apparatus, <ref target=pb50 type=pageref>50</ref>, <ref target=pb358 type=pageref>358</ref>&ndash;60.

<p>Si&ndota;ha, lord of L&amacr;&tdotb;a, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>.

<p>Si&ndota;hana (Si&nmacr;gha&ndotb;a, Si&ndota;ha&ndotb;a), the Y&amacr;dava, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>.

<p>Si&ndota;havi&sdotb;&ndotb;uvarman, a Pallava king, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>.

<p><hi>Siparium</hi>, in Roman mime, <ref target=pb67 type=pageref>67</ref>.

<p>S&imacr;t&amacr;, wife of R&amacr;ma, <ref target=pb30 type=pageref>30</ref>, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>, <ref target=pb52 type=pageref>52</ref>, <ref target=pb63 type=pageref>63</ref>, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>, <ref target=pb115 type=pageref>115</ref>, <ref target=pb119 type=pageref>119</ref>, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>, <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>, <ref target=pb194 type=pageref>194</ref>, <ref target=pb195 type=pageref>195</ref>, <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>, <ref target=pb199 type=pageref>199</ref>, <ref target=pb218 type=pageref>218</ref>, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>, <ref target=pb224 type=pageref>224</ref>, <ref target=pb227 type=pageref>227</ref>, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>, <ref target=pb243 type=pageref>243</ref>, <ref target=pb244 type=pageref>244</ref>, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref>, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>.

<p>S&imacr;t&amacr;beng&amacr; cave, <ref target=pb54 type=pageref>54</ref>, <ref target=pb67 type=pageref>67</ref>, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>.

<p>Skandagupta, Emperor, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>.

<p>Slaughter, as an allegorical character, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.

<p>Slaves (<hi>ce&tdotb;a</hi>), speech of, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>;
  <lb>in the <hi>Prakara&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>;
  <lb>as hero and heroine in the <hi>Prasth&amacr;na</hi>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p>Softening of hard letters, in Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p>Soma rite, <ref target=pb30 type=pageref>30</ref>, <ref target=pb51 type=pageref>51</ref>.

<p>Somadatta, a <hi>N&amacr;yaka</hi>, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>.

<p>Somadeva, author of the <hi>Lalitavigrahar&amacr;jan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, <ref target=pb243 type=pageref>243</ref>, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>.

<p>Somaçarman, in Cambodia, <ref target=pb29 type=pageref>29</ref>.

<p>Someçvara, <hi>K&imacr;rtikaumud&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>, n. <ref target=n248.7 type=noteref>7</ref>.

<p>Somila, <hi>see</hi> Saumilla.

<p>Somism, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>.

<p>Song, in relation to the drama, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb16 type=pageref>16</ref>, <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref>, <ref target=pb25 type=pageref>25</ref>, <ref target=pb44 type=pageref>44</ref>, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>, <ref target=pb50 type=pageref>50</ref>, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p>Sophokles, <ref target=pb59 type=pageref>59</ref>, <ref target=pb197 type=pageref>197</ref>.

<p>Sorrow (<hi>çoka</hi>), as the basis of the pathetic sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p>Sound, figures of (<hi>çabd&amacr;la&mdota;k&amacr;ras</hi>), <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p>Sound effects, in Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb202 type=pageref>202</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>;
  <lb>Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb218 type=pageref>218</ref>;
  <lb>Mur&amacr;ri, <ref target=pb230 type=pageref>230</ref>;
  <lb>R&amacr;jaçekhara, <ref target=pb236 type=pageref>236</ref>.

<p>South Indian recension, of the <hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>;
  <lb>the <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb154 type=pageref>154</ref>, <ref target=pb155 type=pageref>155</ref>.

<p>Spectators, <ref target=pb35 type=pageref>35</ref>&ndash;7, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>&ndash;71;
  <lb>relation to actors, <ref target=pb316 type=pageref>316</ref>, <ref target=pb317 type=pageref>317</ref>, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>, <ref target=pb321 type=pageref>321</ref>, <ref target=pb322 type=pageref>322</ref>.

<p>Spirit, as an allegorical character, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>.

<p>Stage, <ref target=pb359 type=pageref>359</ref>;
  <lb>matters excluded from representation on, <ref target=pb300 type=pageref>300</ref>, <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>.

<p>Stage directions, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>, <ref target=pb113 type=pageref>113</ref>, <ref target=pb364 type=pageref>364</ref>, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>Stage properties, <ref target=pb365 type=pageref>365</ref>, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref><corr sic=",">.</corr>

<p>Stages of the development of the action (<hi>avasth&amacr;</hi>), <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>&ndash;9.

<p>Stanzas, <hi>see</hi> Lyric Stanzas.

<p>Sth&amacr;varaka, servant of Sa&mdota;sth&amacr;naka, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>.

<p>Strength (<hi>ojas</hi>), of style, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p>Struggle of conscience, unknown in the Sanskrit drama, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>.

<p>Style, of Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb114 type=pageref>114</ref>&ndash;20;
  <lb><hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <pb n=390 id=pb390 facs="f:390"><ref target=pb136 type=pageref>136</ref>&ndash;9;
  <lb>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>&ndash;5;
  <lb>Har&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb177 type=pageref>177</ref>&ndash;81;
  <lb>Mahendravikramavarman, <ref target=pb185 type=pageref>185</ref>;
  <lb>Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb196 type=pageref>196</ref>&ndash;203;
  <lb>Viç&amacr;khadatta, <ref target=pb209 type=pageref>209</ref>&ndash;11;
  <lb>Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a <corr sic="Nar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a">N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</corr>, <ref target=pb215 type=pageref>215</ref>&ndash;19;
  <lb>Yaçovarman, <ref target=pb221 type=pageref>221</ref>&ndash;3;
  <lb>Mur&amacr;ri, <ref target=pb230 type=pageref>230</ref>, <ref target=pb231 type=pageref>231</ref>;
  <lb>R&amacr;jaçekhara, <ref target=pb236 type=pageref>236</ref>&ndash;9;
  <lb>K&sdotb;em&imacr;çvara, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>;
  <lb>theoretical views of qualities of, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>&ndash;3, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>;
  <lb><hi>see also</hi> Gau&ddotb;a style, Vaidarbha style.

<p>Styles, dramatic (<hi>v&rdotb;tti</hi>), doctrine of the, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>&ndash;9.

<p>Subandhu, author, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>, <ref target=pb91 type=pageref>91</ref>.

<p>Subhadr&amacr;, taken away by Arjuna, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>.

<p>Subha&tdotb;a, dramatist, <ref target=pb55 type=pageref>55</ref>, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>.

<p>Subjunctures, in the episode, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>.

<p>Subrahma&ndotb;ya Kavi, author of part of the <hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi>, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>.

<p>Subterranean passages, referred to, <ref target=pb206 type=pageref>206</ref>, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>.

<p>Sudarçan&amacr;, wife of the king of K&amacr;çi, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>.

<p>Sude&sdotb;&ndotb;&amacr;, wife of Vir&amacr;&tdotb;a, <ref target=pb63 type=pageref>63</ref>.

<p>Suggestion, in poetry, <ref target=pb276 type=pageref>276</ref>, <ref target=pb277 type=pageref>277</ref>, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>, <ref target=pb322 type=pageref>322</ref>;
  <lb>in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa as opposed to Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb161 type=pageref>161</ref>.

<p>Sugr&imacr;va, brother of V&amacr;lin, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>, <ref target=pb194 type=pageref>194</ref>, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>, <ref target=pb308 type=pageref>308</ref>, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p>Suicide, motif, <ref target=pb107 type=pageref>107</ref>.

<p>Sumeru, description of, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>.

<p>Sumitr&amacr;, mother of Jayadeva, <ref target=pb242 type=pageref>242</ref>.

<p>Sundaramiçra, author of the <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaprad&imacr;pa</hi>, <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>.

<p>Sundering of lovers, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p>Supernatural, <ref target=pb159 type=pageref>159</ref>, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>, <hi>and see</hi> Wonder.

<p>Sur&amacr;nanda, an ancestor of R&amacr;jaçekhara, <ref target=pb231 type=pageref>231</ref>.

<p>Sur&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;ra, speeches used in, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>.

<p>Susa, people of, <corr sic=know>knew</corr> Greek dramas, <ref target=pb59 type=pageref>59</ref>.

<p>Susa&mdota;gat&amacr;, confidante of Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;, <ref target=pb172 type=pageref>172</ref>, <ref target=pb176 type=pageref>176</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>.

<p>S&umacr;tas, slain by Bh&imacr;ma, <ref target=pb97 type=pageref>97</ref>, n. <ref target=n97.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>Suvar&ndotb;&amacr;k&sdotb;&imacr;, mother of Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb80 type=pageref>80</ref>.

<p>Suvar&ndotb;açekhara, on the Ganges, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>.

<p>Suvega, a spy, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>.

<p>Svayambh&umacr;, creator of the pigments, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>.

<p>Sw&amacr;ng of North-West India, <ref target=pb273 type=pageref>273</ref>.

<p>Sweetness of style, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p>Swinging, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>;
  <lb>description of, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>, <ref target=pb238 type=pageref>238</ref>.

<p>Synonyms, free use of, <ref target=pb283 type=pageref>283</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.t>
<head>T</head>

<p>T&amacr;&ddotb;ak&amacr;, a demoness, <ref target=pb227 type=pageref>227</ref>.

<p>&Tdotb;akkas, use of Apabhra&ndota;ça by, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>.

<p>Tales, close connexion of, with the drama, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>, and see <hi>Kath&amacr;sarits&amacr;gara</hi>.

<p>Tamas&amacr;, river, goddess, as a dramatic character, <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>, <ref target=pb202 type=pageref>202</ref>.

<p>Tantras, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>.

<p>Tantumat&imacr;, mother of Mur&amacr;ri, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>.

<p>T&amacr;r&amacr;, wife of V&amacr;lin, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>.

<p>Tarala, an ancestor of R&amacr;jaçekhara, <ref target=pb231 type=pageref>231</ref>.

<p>T&amacr;rk&sdotb;ya, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>.

<p>Tears, of the auditor, <ref target=pb321 type=pageref>321</ref>, <ref target=pb368 type=pageref>368</ref>.

<p>Technique, of Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb82 type=pageref>82</ref>&ndash;5;
  <lb>Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>&ndash;14;
  <lb>K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb126 type=pageref>126</ref>, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>;
  <lb>Yaçovarman, <ref target=pb222 type=pageref>222</ref>, <ref target=pb223 type=pageref>223</ref>;
  <lb>R&amacr;jaçekhara, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref>;
  <lb>Prahl&amacr;danadeva, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>;
  <lb>certain irregular dramas, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>&ndash;5;
  <lb>according to the writers on theory, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>&ndash;305.

<p>Teja&hdotb;p&amacr;la, brother of Vastup&amacr;la, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>, <ref target=pb250 type=pageref>250</ref>.

<p>Ten qualities of style, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p>Ten stages of love, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p>Ten types of drama, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>&ndash;9.

<p>Terror (<hi>bhaya</hi>), as the basis of the sentiment of terror, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p>Terror, sentiment of, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>, <ref target=pb324 type=pageref>324</ref>, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p>Th&amacr;r&amacr;padra, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>.

<p>Theatre, buildings, <ref target=pb67 type=pageref>67</ref>, <ref target=pb358 type=pageref>358</ref>&ndash;60.

<p>Theft, as an allegorical character, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.

<p>Theories of the Secular Origin of the Drama, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>&ndash;57.

<p>Theory of the drama, <ref target=pb290 type=pageref>290</ref>&ndash;351;
  <lb>influence of, on dramatic practice, <ref target=pb352 type=pageref>352</ref>&ndash;4;
  <lb>possible influence of Aristotle on, <ref target=pb355 type=pageref>355</ref>, <ref target=pb356 type=pageref>356</ref>.

<p>Tibet, drama in, <ref target=pb44 type=pageref>44</ref>.

<p>Tiger, escape of, as dramatic motif, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>.

<p>Time, of performance of plays, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>;
  <lb>unity of, <ref target=pb64 type=pageref>64</ref>, <ref target=pb65 type=pageref>65</ref>, <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>, <ref target=pb355 type=pageref>355</ref>.

<p>T&imacr;rthakaras, invocation of the, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>.

<p>&Tdotb;odar Mall, Akbar&apos;s minister, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>.

<p>Tradition, as the fifth Veda, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb13 type=pageref>13</ref>.

<p>Traditional account of the origin of Sanskrit drama, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb13 type=pageref>13</ref>;
  <lb>of dramatic theory, <ref target=pb290 type=pageref>290</ref>.

<p>Tragedy, <ref target=pb38 type=pageref>38</ref>, n. <ref target=n38.2 type=noteref>2</ref>, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>, <ref target=pb280 type=pageref>280</ref>, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>, <ref target=pb354 type=pageref>354</ref>.

<p>Trailokyavarmadeva, of K&amacr;lañjara, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>.

<p>Transitory (<hi>vyabhic&amacr;rin</hi>), feelings, <ref target=pb315 type=pageref>315</ref>.

<p>Transmigration, as explaining sensibility to poetry, <ref target=pb322 type=pageref>322</ref>.

<p>Transverse, curtain, <ref target=pb113 type=pageref>113</ref>, n. <ref target=n113.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb359 type=pageref>359</ref>.

<p>Trava&ndotb;as, speech of people of, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>.

<p>Triads, Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s fondness for, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>.

<p>Tribhuvanap&amacr;la, of A&ndotb;ahilap&amacr;&tdotb;aka, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>.

<p>Triple explanation (<hi>trigata</hi>), <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>.

<p>Tukkoj&imacr;, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>.

<p>Tumultuous action or disturbance (<hi>avap&amacr;ta</hi>), <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>.

<p>Tu&nmacr;gabhadr&amacr;, river, as a dramatic character, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>.

<p>Tuñjina, of Kashmir, patron of Candraka, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>.

<p>Turfan, fragments of Buddhist dramas, <ref target=pb80 type=pageref>80</ref>.

<p>Twelve stages of love, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>, n. <ref target=n323.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p>Types of drama, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>&ndash;51.

<pb n=391 id=pb391 facs="f:391"><p>Typical, not individual, characters, found in Sanskrit drama, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.u>
<head>U</head>

<p>Udayana, <ref target=pb94 type=pageref>94</ref>, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>, <ref target=pb103 type=pageref>103</ref>, <ref target=pb107 type=pageref>107</ref>, <ref target=pb108 type=pageref>108</ref>, <ref target=pb125 type=pageref>125</ref>, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>, <hi>and see</hi> Vatsa.

<p>Udda&ndotb;&ddotb;an&amacr;tha or Udda&ndotb;&ddotb;in, author of the <hi>Mallik&amacr;m&amacr;ruta</hi>, <ref target=pb221 type=pageref>221</ref>, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>.

<p>U&ddotb;ras, a people, colour of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>Udumbaras, family of Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb186 type=pageref>186</ref>.

<p>Ugrasena, king, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>.

<p>Ujjayin&imacr;, importance of, in Indian history, <ref target=pb60 type=pageref>60</ref>;
  <lb>for Sanskrit drama, <ref target=pb70 type=pageref>70</ref>, <ref target=pb71 type=pageref>71</ref>, <ref target=pb74 type=pageref>74</ref>, <ref target=pb94 type=pageref>94</ref>;
  <lb>speech used in, <ref target=pb70 type=pageref>70</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p>Um&amacr;, dance in honour of, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>.

<p>Umvek&amacr;c&amacr;rya, alleged identity of, with Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb186 type=pageref>186</ref>.

<p>Union of lovers, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p>Unities, dramatic, of subject, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>&ndash;300;
  <lb>of time, <ref target=pb64 type=pageref>64</ref>, <ref target=pb65 type=pageref>65</ref>, <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>, <ref target=pb355 type=pageref>355</ref>;
  <lb>of place, <ref target=pb355 type=pageref>355</ref>.

<p>Uragas, snakes, clothing of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>&Umacr;rmil&amacr;, daughter of Janaka, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>.

<p>Urvaç&imacr;, a nymph, <ref target=pb14 type=pageref>14</ref>, <ref target=pb114 type=pageref>114</ref>, <ref target=pb149 type=pageref>149</ref>&ndash;51, <ref target=pb156 type=pageref>156</ref>, <ref target=pb362 type=pageref>362</ref>, <ref target=pb364 type=pageref>364</ref>.

<p>U&sdotb;avad&amacr;ta (<hi rend=asc>A.D.</hi> 124), <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>.

<p>Utpaladeva, <hi>alias</hi> Muñja, <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref>.

<p>Uttar&amacr;, a princess, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.v>
<head>V</head>

<p>Vaibh&amacr;ra, mount, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>.

<p>Vaidarbha style, <ref target=pb161 type=pageref>161</ref>, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p>Vairantya, capital of Kuntibhoja, <ref target=pb109 type=pageref>109</ref>.

<p>Vairodhaka, in the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, <ref target=pb206 type=pageref>206</ref>.

<p>Vaiçya, <ref target=pb37 type=pageref>37</ref>, <ref target=pb38 type=pageref>38</ref>, <ref target=pb73 type=pageref>73</ref>, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>;
  <lb>colour of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>;
  <lb>seats of, <ref target=pb359 type=pageref>359</ref>;
  <lb>in the Mah&amacr;vrata rite, <ref target=pb24 type=pageref>24</ref>.

<p>Vai&sdotb;&ndotb;avas, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p>Vajran&amacr;bha, in the K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a legend, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>.

<p>Vajravarman, an aboriginal prince, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>.

<p>V&amacr;kpati, author of the <hi>Gaü&ddotb;avaha</hi>, <ref target=pb91 type=pageref>91</ref>, <ref target=pb92 type=pageref>92</ref>, <ref target=pb187 type=pageref>187</ref>.

<p>V&amacr;lin, a monkey king, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>, <ref target=pb114 type=pageref>114</ref>, <ref target=pb119 type=pageref>119</ref>, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>, <ref target=pb194 type=pageref>194</ref>, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p>Vallabhadeva, commentator on the <hi>Meghad&umacr;ta</hi>, <ref target=pb145 type=pageref>145</ref>.

<p>V&amacr;lm&imacr;ki, author of the <hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb114 type=pageref>114</ref>, <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>.

<p>Valour, as an allegorical character, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref><corr>.</corr>

<p>V&amacr;madeva, a seer, <ref target=pb14 type=pageref>14</ref>, <ref target=pb226 type=pageref>226</ref>.

<p>V&amacr;mana, a writer on poetics, <ref target=pb92 type=pageref>92</ref>, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>, <ref target=pb103 type=pageref>103</ref>, <ref target=pb104 type=pageref>104</ref>, <ref target=pb145 type=pageref>145</ref>, <ref target=pb330 type=pageref>330</ref>, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p>V&amacr;mana Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a B&amacr;&ndotb;a, author of the <hi>P&amacr;rvat&imacr;pari&ndotb;aya</hi>, <ref target=pb221 type=pageref>221</ref>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>.

<p>Va&nmacr;gas, a people, colour of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>.

<p>Varad&amacr;c&amacr;rya, author of the <hi>Vasantatilaka</hi>, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p>Var&amacr;hamihira, date of, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>.

<p>Vardham&amacr;na, capital of Ç&umacr;draka, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>.

<p>Vardham&amacr;naka, servant of C&amacr;rudatta, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>.

<p>Vardham&amacr;na Sv&amacr;min, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>.

<p>Varu&ndotb;a and Indra, dialogue of, <ref target=pb15 type=pageref>15</ref>, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>.

<p>Vasant&amacr;c&amacr;rya, son of Dhanika Pa&ndotb;&ddotb;ita, <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref>.

<p>Vasantasen&amacr;, heroine of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb104 type=pageref>104</ref>, <ref target=pb131 type=pageref>131</ref>, <ref target=pb132 type=pageref>132</ref>, <ref target=pb133 type=pageref>133</ref>, <ref target=pb134 type=pageref>134</ref>, <ref target=pb135 type=pageref>135</ref>, <ref target=pb136 type=pageref>136</ref>, <ref target=pb139 type=pageref>139</ref>, <ref target=pb140 type=pageref>140</ref>, <ref target=pb309 type=pageref>309</ref>, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>, n. <ref target=n335.3 type=noteref>3</ref>, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>.

<p>V&amacr;sant&imacr;, in the <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi>, <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>, <ref target=pb200 type=pageref>200</ref>.

<p>V&amacr;sava, <ref target=pb83 type=pageref>83</ref>, n. <ref target=n83.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>, <hi>and see</hi> Indra.

<p>V&amacr;savadatt&amacr;, queen of Udayana, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>, <ref target=pb107 type=pageref>107</ref>, <ref target=pb108 type=pageref>108</ref>, <ref target=pb109 type=pageref>109</ref>, <ref target=pb113 type=pageref>113</ref>, <ref target=pb119 type=pageref>119</ref>, <ref target=pb125 type=pageref>125</ref>, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>&ndash;4, <ref target=pb176 type=pageref>176</ref>, <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>, <ref target=pb304 type=pageref>304</ref>.

<p>Vasi&sdotb;&tdotb;ha, a sage, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>;
  <lb>dialogue of, in the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi>, <ref target=pb14 type=pageref>14</ref>, <ref target=pb17 type=pageref>17</ref>.

<p>Vassal princes, where placed in the <corr sic=auditorinm>auditorium</corr>, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p>Vasubandhu, the Buddhist philosopher, <ref target=pb145 type=pageref>145</ref>, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>.

<p>Vasubh&umacr;ti, a minister, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>.

<p>Vasudeva, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>, <ref target=pb98 type=pageref>98</ref>, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>, <ref target=pb214 type=pageref>214</ref>, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>.

<p>V&amacr;sudeva, <ref target=pb32 type=pageref>32</ref>, <ref target=pb34 type=pageref>34</ref>, <hi>and see</hi> K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a.

<p>Vasukra, dialogue with Indra, <ref target=pb14 type=pageref>14</ref>.

<p>Vasulak&sdotb;m&imacr;, a princess, in the <hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi>, <ref target=pb148 type=pageref>148</ref>.

<p>Vasumat&imacr;, a queen of Du&hdotb;&sdotb;anta, <ref target=pb158 type=pageref>158</ref>.

<p>Vasumitra, of the Çu&nmacr;ga dynasty, defeats the Yavanas, <ref target=pb149 type=pageref>149</ref>;
  <lb>favours actors, <ref target=pb364 type=pageref>364</ref>.

<p>Vastup&amacr;la, minister of V&imacr;radhavala of Gujar&amacr;t, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>, <ref target=pb250 type=pageref>250</ref>.

<p>Va&tdotb;eçvaradatta, the feudatory (<hi>s&amacr;manta</hi>), grandfather of Viç&amacr;khadatta, <ref target=pb204 type=pageref>204</ref>.

<p>Vatsa, or Udayana, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>, <ref target=pb108 type=pageref>108</ref>, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>&ndash;4, <ref target=pb176 type=pageref>176</ref>, <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>, <ref target=pb304 type=pageref>304</ref>, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>, <ref target=pb309 type=pageref>309</ref>, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>, <ref target=pb361 type=pageref>361</ref>, <ref target=pb362 type=pageref>362</ref>, <ref target=pb364 type=pageref>364</ref>.

<p>Vatsabha&tdotb;&tdotb;i, imitates K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>.

<p>Vatsar&amacr;ja, dramatist, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>, <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>.

<p>V&amacr;tsy&amacr;yana, author of the <hi>K&amacr;maç&amacr;stra</hi>, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>.

<p>Veda, the fifth, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb13 type=pageref>13</ref>.

<p>Vedakavi, author of the <hi>Vidy&amacr;pari&ndotb;ayana</hi>, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>, n. <ref target=n253.4 type=noteref>4</ref>.

<p>Ved&amacr;nta, in the <hi>Prabodhacandrodaya</hi>, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>&ndash;3.

<p>Ved&amacr;ntav&amacr;g&imacr;ça, <hi>Bhojacarita</hi>, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>.

<p>Vedic ritual, dramatic elements in the, <ref target=pb23 type=pageref>23</ref>&ndash;7.

<p>Vegetation ritual, and drama, <ref target=pb45 type=pageref>45</ref>.

<p>Vema, prince of Ko&ndotb;&ddotb;av&imacr;&ddotb;u, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>.

<p>Ve&nmacr;ka&tdotb;an&amacr;tha, author of the <hi>Sa&mdota;kalpas&umacr;ryodaya</hi>, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>.

<p>Ve&nmacr;ka&tdotb;avarada, author of the <hi>K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;avijaya</hi>, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>.

<p>Verbal (<hi>bh&amacr;rat&imacr;</hi>) manner, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>;
  <lb>in the <hi>Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>.

<p>Vernaculars, use of, <ref target=pb243 type=pageref>243</ref>, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>.

<p>Vernacular drama, <ref target=pb243 type=pageref>243</ref>.

<p>Verse, in drama, <ref target=pb23 type=pageref>23</ref>, <ref target=pb56 type=pageref>56</ref>, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>, <ref target=pb73 type=pageref>73</ref>, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>, <ref target=pb90 type=pageref>90</ref>, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>, <ref target=pb282 type=pageref>282</ref>, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>.

<p>Vibh&imacr;&sdotb;a&ndotb;a, brother of R&amacr;va&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<pb n=392 id=pb392 facs="f:392"><p>Vidiç&amacr;, <ref target=pb147 type=pageref>147</ref>.

<p>Vidy&amacr;dhara, writer on poetics, <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref>, <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>, <ref target=pb295 type=pageref>295</ref>, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>.

<p>Vidy&amacr;dharamalla, hero of the <hi>Viddhaç&amacr;labhañjik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>.

<p>Vidy&amacr;dharas, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>, n. <ref target=n111.3 type=noteref>3</ref>, <ref target=pb174 type=pageref>174</ref>, <ref target=pb191 type=pageref>191</ref>, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>.

<p>Vidy&amacr;dhar&imacr;s, wear jewels on the stage, <ref target=pb367 type=pageref>367</ref>.

<p>Vidy&amacr;n&amacr;tha, author of the <hi>Prat&amacr;parudr&imacr;ya</hi>, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>, <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref>, <ref target=pb295 type=pageref>295</ref>.

<p>Vidy&amacr;ra&ndotb;ya, perhaps S&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>.

<p>Vigrahar&amacr;ja, <hi>see</hi> V&imacr;saladeva.

<p>Vijayako&sdotb;&tdotb;ha, or Vijayaprako&sdotb;&tdotb;ha, ancestor of K&sdotb;em&imacr;çvara, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>.

<p>Vijayasena, general of Vatsa, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>.

<p>Vijñ&amacr;nav&amacr;da school, <ref target=pb80 type=pageref>80</ref>.

<p>Vikram&amacr;ditya, <ref target=pb130 type=pageref>130</ref>, <ref target=pb143 type=pageref>143</ref>.

<p>Vikramasi&ndota;ha, a prince, <ref target=pb133 type=pageref>133</ref>.

<p>Vil&amacr;saçekhara, a <hi>Vi&tdotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p>Vinayavasu, a chamberlain of D&rdotb;&ddotb;havarman, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>.

<p>Vindhyaketu, a prince, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>.

<p>Violent (<hi>&amacr;rabha&tdotb;&imacr;</hi>) manner, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>.

<p>Vir&amacr;dhaka, in the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, <ref target=pb206 type=pageref>206</ref>, <ref target=pb208 type=pageref>208</ref>.

<p>V&imacr;radhavala, king of Gujar&amacr;t, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>, <ref target=pb249 type=pageref>249</ref>, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>.

<p>V&imacr;raka, a policeman, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>.

<p>Vir&amacr;&tdotb;a, a king, <ref target=pb97 type=pageref>97</ref>, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>.

<p>Viç&amacr;khadatta, dramatist (date as a younger contemporary of K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa supported, but inconclusively, by J. Charpentier, JRAS., 1923, pp. 585 ff.), <ref target=pb204 type=pageref>204</ref>&ndash;12, <ref target=pb218 type=pageref>218</ref>, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>.

<p>Viçv&amacr;mitra, a sage, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>, <ref target=pb226 type=pageref>226</ref>, <ref target=pb227 type=pageref>227</ref>, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>;
  <lb>father of Çakuntal&amacr;, <ref target=pb152 type=pageref>152</ref>;
  <lb>dialogue of, with the rivers in the <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi>, <ref target=pb14 type=pageref>14</ref>, <ref target=pb17 type=pageref>17</ref>, <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref>.

<p>Viçvanagara, a mendicant, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>.

<p>Viçvan&amacr;tha, author of the <hi>M&rdotb;g&amacr;&nmacr;kalekh&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>, n. <ref target=n257.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>Viçvan&amacr;tha, author of the <hi>S&amacr;hityadarpa&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>, <ref target=pb223 type=pageref>223</ref>, <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>, <ref target=pb295 type=pageref>295</ref>, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>, <ref target=pb310 type=pageref>310</ref>, <ref target=pb321 type=pageref>321</ref>, <ref target=pb322 type=pageref>322</ref>, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>, <ref target=pb341 type=pageref>341</ref>, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>, <ref target=pb343 type=pageref>343</ref>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>, <ref target=pb349 type=pageref>349</ref>, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>.

<p>Viçvan&amacr;tha, author of the <hi>Saugandhik&amacr;hara&ndotb;a</hi> (not, as Winternitz, GIL. iii. 248, suggests, the writer on poetics, who does not cite the work as his), <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>.

<p>Viçvantara, legend of, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>.

<p>Viçveçvara, author of the <hi>Ç&rdotb;&nmacr;g&amacr;ramañjar&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>.

<p>Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb17 type=pageref>17</ref>, <ref target=pb26 type=pageref>26</ref>, <ref target=pb98 type=pageref>98</ref>, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>, <ref target=pb106 type=pageref>106</ref>, <ref target=pb112 type=pageref>112</ref>, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>, <ref target=pb354 type=pageref>354</ref>.

<p>Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u, censure of actors, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>.

<p>Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u, father of Dhana&mdota;jaya and Dhanika, <ref target=pb292 type=pageref>292</ref>, <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref>.

<p>V&imacr;saladeva Vigrahar&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>;
  <lb> author of the Harakelin&amacr;&tdotb;aka, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>.

<p>Visions of the dying, <ref target=pb114 type=pageref>114</ref>.

<p>Vocative of <hi>a</hi> stems in <hi>&amacr;</hi>, in Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>;
  <lb><hi>&rdotb;</hi> stems in <hi>&amacr;</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>.

<p>Voice in the air, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>;
  <lb>in the <hi>Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>.

<p>V&rdotb;nd&amacr;, or Lak&sdotb;m&imacr;, <ref target=pb274 type=pageref>274</ref>.

<p>V&rdotb;nd&amacr;, wood, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>.

<p>V&rdotb;&sdotb;&amacr;kapi, comparison of, with the <hi>Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka</hi>, <ref target=pb51 type=pageref>51</ref>, n. <ref target=n51.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>V&rdotb;&sdotb;&amacr;kapi, hymn, <ref target=pb14 type=pageref>14</ref>, <ref target=pb18 type=pageref>18</ref>.

<p>V&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;is, K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a born in the family of the, <ref target=pb98 type=pageref>98</ref>.

<p>Vy&amacr;sa, Çr&imacr;r&amacr;madeva, dramatist, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.w>
<head>W</head>

<p>Warriors (<hi>yodha</hi>), speech of, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p>Watchers, speech of, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p>Weber, Prof. Albrecht, as to origin of drama, <ref target=pb32 type=pageref>32</ref>, <ref target=pb33 type=pageref>33</ref>, <ref target=pb57 type=pageref>57</ref>.

<p>Western K&sdotb;atrapas, alleged influence of, on drama, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>&ndash;72.

<p>Wife, characteristics of a, <ref target=pb308 type=pageref>308</ref>, <ref target=pb309 type=pageref>309</ref>.

<p>Windisch, Prof. E., theory of epic, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>;
  <lb>on Greek origin of the drama, <ref target=pb57 type=pageref>57</ref>&ndash;64;
  <lb>on the plot of the <hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb130 type=pageref>130</ref>.

<p>Winternitz, Prof. M., <ref target=pb33 type=pageref>33</ref>, n. <ref target=n33.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p>Woman, disguised as a boy, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>;
  <lb>using Sanskrit as comic, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>;
  <lb>may use it in various cases, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>.

<p>Women, as poets, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>, <ref target=pb288 type=pageref>288</ref>;
  <lb>as spectators, of the drama, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p>Women&apos;s apartments, speech of those living in, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p>Women&apos;s <corr sic=roles>rôles</corr>, played sometimes by men, <ref target=pb362 type=pageref>362</ref>.

<p>Wonder, sentiment of, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>, <ref target=pb324 type=pageref>324</ref>.

<p>Wood-workers, speech of, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>.

<p>Words, qualities of, <ref target=pb321 type=pageref>321</ref>, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>, <ref target=pb333 type=pageref>333</ref>, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>.

<p>Worship of the dead, alleged origin of drama in the, <ref target=pb46 type=pageref>46</ref>, <ref target=pb47 type=pageref>47</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.x>
<head>X</head>

<p>Xanthos, legend of, <ref target=pb37 type=pageref>37</ref>, <ref target=pb38 type=pageref>38</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.y>
<head>Y</head>

<p>Y&amacr;davas, drama among the, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>.

<p>Yajñasena, a prince, <ref target=pb147 type=pageref>147</ref>.

<p>Yak&sdotb;as, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>, n. <ref target=n339.3 type=noteref>3</ref>;
  <lb>dress of, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>;
  <lb>hair of, <ref target=pb367 type=pageref>367</ref>.

<p>Yak&sdotb;&imacr;s, carry jewels, <ref target=pb367 type=pageref>367</ref>.

<p>Yama and Yam&imacr;, dialogue of, <ref target=pb13 type=pageref>13</ref>, <ref target=pb14 type=pageref>14</ref>, <ref target=pb19 type=pageref>19</ref>, <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref>.

<p>Yamala and Arjuna, demons, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>.

<p>Yamun&amacr;, <ref target=pb245 type=pageref>245</ref>.

<p>Yaça&hdotb;p&amacr;la, author of the <hi>Mohar&amacr;japar&amacr;jaya</hi>, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>&ndash;6.

<p>Yaçaçcandra, author of the <hi>Mudritakumudacandra</hi>, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>.

<p>Yaçod&amacr;, wife of Nanda, <ref target=pb98 type=pageref>98</ref>.

<p>Yaçodharman, conqueror of the H&umacr;&ndotb;as, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>.

<p>Yaçovarman, of Kanyakubja, as a dramatist, <ref target=pb186 type=pageref>186</ref>, <ref target=pb187 type=pageref>187</ref>, <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>, <ref target=pb221 type=pageref>221</ref>, <ref target=pb222 type=pageref>222</ref>.

<pb n=393 id=pb393 facs="f:393"><p>Y&amacr;ska, <ref target=pb15 type=pageref>15</ref>.

<p>Y&amacr;tr&amacr;s, <ref target=pb16 type=pageref>16</ref>, <ref target=pb17 type=pageref>17</ref>, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>, <ref target=pb51 type=pageref>51</ref>, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref>.

<p>Yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>, <ref target=pb103 type=pageref>103</ref>, <ref target=pb107 type=pageref>107</ref>, <ref target=pb108 type=pageref>108</ref>, <ref target=pb113 type=pageref>113</ref>, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>, <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>, <ref target=pb262 type=pageref>262</ref>.

<p>Yavanas, <ref target=pb356 type=pageref>356</ref>, <ref target=pb366 type=pageref>366</ref>;
  <lb>defeated by Vasumitra, <ref target=pb149 type=pageref>149</ref>;
  <lb>Apabhra&ndota;ça assigned to, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>, n. <ref target=n336.1 type=noteref>1</ref>;
  <lb>see also <hi><corr sic="Yavan&amacr;n&imacr;">Yavanan&imacr;s</corr></hi>.

<p>Yavan&imacr;s, in king&apos;s harem, <ref target=pb61 type=pageref>61</ref>, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>.

<p>Y&amacr;y&amacr;vara family, <ref target=pb231 type=pageref>231</ref>.

<p>Yudh&amacr;jit, uncle of Bharata, <ref target=pb189 type=pageref>189</ref>.

<p>Yudhi&sdotb;&tdotb;hira, oldest of the P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;avas, <ref target=pb83 type=pageref>83</ref>, <ref target=pb214 type=pageref>214</ref>, <ref target=pb215 type=pageref>215</ref>, <ref target=pb308 type=pageref>308</ref>.

<p>Yug&amacr;dideva, the T&imacr;rthakara &Rdotb;&sdotb;abha, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.en.z>
<head>Z</head>

<p>Z&emacr;lotypos, compared with <hi>Çak&amacr;ra</hi>, <ref target=pb67 type=pageref>67</ref>.





<pb n=394 id=pb394 facs="f:394">
<div1 id=ix.sa>
<head>SANSKRIT INDEX</head>


<divGen type=IndexToc>

<div2 id=ix.sa.a>
<head>A</head>

<p><hi>Agni Pur&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb295 type=pageref>295</ref>, <ref target=pb349 type=pageref>349</ref>.

<p><hi>A&nmacr;ka</hi>, act, <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>.

<p><hi>A&nmacr;ka</hi>, one act play, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>, <ref target=pb295 type=pageref>295</ref>, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>.

<p><hi>A&nmacr;kamukha</hi>, anticipatory scene, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>.

<p><hi>A&nmacr;k&amacr;vat&amacr;ra</hi>, continuation scene, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>.

<p><hi>Ajjuk&amacr;</hi>, style of a hetaera, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>Atijagat&imacr;</hi>, metre, appropriate to lively dialogue, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p><hi>Atidh&rdotb;ti</hi>, metre, appropriate to the pathetic sentiment, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p><hi>Atibala</hi>, outvying, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>.

<p><hi>Att&amacr;&ndotb;a&mdota;</hi>, in Bh&amacr;sa for <hi>att&amacr;&ndotb;aa&mdota;</hi>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p><hi>Atharvaveda</hi>, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb15 type=pageref>15</ref>.

<p><hi>Ada&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;raho</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>.

<p><hi>Adbhuta</hi>, wonder, as a sentiment, <ref target=pb324 type=pageref>324</ref>.

<p><hi>Adbhutadarpa&ndotb;a</hi>, by Mah&amacr;deva, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>.

<p><hi>Adbhut&amacr;r&ndotb;ava</hi>, by Kavibh&umacr;&sdotb;a&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>.

<p><hi>Adhik&amacr;ra</hi>, attainment of hero&apos;s purpose, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>.

<p><hi>Adhibala</hi>, outvying, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>.

<p><hi>Anarghar&amacr;ghava</hi><corr>,</corr> by Mur&amacr;ri, <ref target=pb226 type=pageref>226</ref>&ndash;31, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>, n. <ref target=n344.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb362 type=pageref>362</ref>.

<p><hi>Anuk&umacr;la</hi>, loyal (hero), <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>.

<p><hi>Anuk&rdotb;ti</hi>, mimesis, <ref target=pb355 type=pageref>355</ref>, and see <hi>Avasth&amacr;nuk&rdotb;ti</hi>.

<p><hi>Anuc&amacr;rik&amacr;</hi>, king&apos;s attendant, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>.

<p><hi>Anubh&amacr;vas</hi>, consequents of sentiments, <ref target=pb315 type=pageref>315</ref>.

<p><hi>Anuç&amacr;sana Parvan</hi>, allusion to drama in, <ref target=pb28 type=pageref>28</ref>.

<p><hi>Anu&sdotb;&tdotb;ubh</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>.

<p><hi>Antarasandhi</hi>, nature of, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>.

<p><hi>Any&amacr;</hi>, <hi>anyastr&imacr;</hi>, heroine as wife of another, <ref target=pb308 type=pageref>308</ref>.

<p><hi>Apa&tdotb;&imacr;</hi>, curtain, <ref target=pb61 type=pageref>61</ref>, <ref target=pb359 type=pageref>359</ref>.

<p><hi>Aparavaktra</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>.

<p><hi>Apav&amacr;ritam</hi>, confidentially, <ref target=pb304 type=pageref>304</ref>.

<p><hi>Abhijñ&amacr;na</hi>, recognition, as motif, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>.

<p><hi><corr sic="Abhijñ&amacr;naçakuntala">Abhijñ&amacr;naçakuntal&amacr;</corr></hi>, (drama) of Çakuntal&amacr; (recognised) by a token of recognition, see <hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>.

<p><hi>Abhidh&amacr;</hi>, power of denotation, <ref target=pb317 type=pageref>317</ref>.

<p><hi>Abhinayadarpa&ndotb;a</hi>, by Nandikeçvara, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>, n. <ref target=n338.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb367 type=pageref>367</ref>, n. <ref target=n367.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>Abhinavabh&amacr;rat&imacr;</hi>, by Abhinavagupta, <ref target=pb291 type=pageref>291</ref>.

<p><hi>Abhir&amacr;mar&amacr;ghava</hi>, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>, n. <ref target=n329.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>, n. <ref target=n344.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>Abhivyakti</hi>, revelation of sentiment, <ref target=pb317 type=pageref>317</ref>.

<p><hi>Abhi&sdotb;ekan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, by Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb94 type=pageref>94</ref>, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>, <ref target=pb113 type=pageref>113</ref>, <ref target=pb114 type=pageref>114</ref>, <ref target=pb115 type=pageref>115</ref>.

<p><hi>Abhis&amacr;rik&amacr;</hi>, type of heroine, <ref target=pb309 type=pageref>309</ref>.

<p><hi>Am&amacr;tya</hi>, minister, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>.

<p><hi>Am&rdotb;todaya</hi>, by Gokulan&amacr;tha, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>, n. <ref target=n253.3 type=noteref>3</ref>, <ref target=pb343 type=pageref>343</ref>.

<p><hi>Amb&amacr;</hi>, style of a go-between, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>Amm&amacr;bh&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi>, by Varad&amacr;c&amacr;rya, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p><hi>Amh&amacr;a&mdota;</hi>, genitive plural in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p><hi>Amhe</hi>, in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p><hi>Ayoga</hi>, privation, as form of the erotic sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p><hi>Ayy&amacr;bh&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi>, by R&amacr;mabhadra D&imacr;k&sdotb;ita, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p><hi>Arthaprak&rdotb;ti</hi>, elements of the plot, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>.

<p><hi>Arthavyakti</hi>, precision of exposition, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p><hi>Arthaç&amacr;stra</hi>, <hi>Kau&tdotb;il&imacr;ya</hi>, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>, <ref target=pb291 type=pageref>291</ref>, n. <ref target=n291.2 type=noteref>2</ref>, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>, <ref target=pb364 type=pageref>364</ref>;
  <lb>whether known by K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>, n. <ref target=n167.6 type=noteref>6</ref>.

<p><hi>Arth&amacr;ntarany&amacr;sa</hi>, a figure, <ref target=pb125 type=pageref>125</ref>.

<p><hi>Arthopak&sdotb;epaka</hi>, scenes of introduction, <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>.

<p><hi>Ardha-M&amacr;gadh&imacr;</hi>, a Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb74 type=pageref>74</ref>, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p><hi>Arh</hi>, epenthetic vowel in Pr&amacr;krit of Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>.

<p><hi>Ala&mdota;k&amacr;ras</hi>, poetic figures, <ref target=pb330 type=pageref>330</ref>, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>;
  <lb>see also <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;ak&amacr;la&mdota;k&amacr;ra</hi> and <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;y&amacr;la&mdota;k&amacr;ra</hi>.

<p><hi>Alaukika</hi>, sentiment as supernatural, <ref target=pb319 type=pageref>319</ref>.

<p><hi>Avatara&ndotb;a</hi>, entry of performers, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>, and see <hi>Ra&nmacr;g&amacr;vatara&ndotb;a</hi>.

<p><hi>Avad&amacr;naçataka</hi>, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>.

<p><hi>Avantik&amacr;</hi>, a Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>.

<p><hi>Avap&amacr;ta</hi>, disturbance, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>.

<p><hi>Avalagita</hi>, continuance, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>.

<p><hi>Avaloka</hi>, Dhanika&apos;s commentary on the <hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi>, <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref>.

<p><hi>Avasth&amacr;</hi>, stage of development of the action of the drama, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>&ndash;9.

<p><hi>Avasth&amacr;nuk&rdotb;ti</hi>, as nature of drama, <ref target=pb295 type=pageref>295</ref>.

<p><hi>Avasyandita</hi>, re-interpretation, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>.

<p><hi>Avim&amacr;raka</hi>, by Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb94 type=pageref>94</ref>, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>, <ref target=pb107 type=pageref>107</ref>, <ref target=pb108 type=pageref>108</ref>, <ref target=pb109 type=pageref>109</ref>, <ref target=pb112 type=pageref>112</ref>, <ref target=pb113 type=pageref>113</ref>, <ref target=pb125 type=pageref>125</ref>, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>.

<p><hi>Açoka</hi>, tree, <ref target=pb159 type=pageref>159</ref>, <ref target=pb222 type=pageref>222</ref>, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>, <ref target=pb238 type=pageref>238</ref>.

<p><hi>Açvattha</hi>, tree, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref>, <ref target=pb213 type=pageref>213</ref>, <ref target=pb214 type=pageref>214</ref>, <ref target=pb215 type=pageref>215</ref>, <ref target=pb217 type=pageref>217</ref>.

<p><hi>A&sdotb;&tdotb;&amacr;dhy&amacr;y&imacr;</hi>, careful preservation of the, <ref target=pb290 type=pageref>290</ref>.

<p><hi>Asatpral&amacr;pa</hi>, incoherent talk, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>.

<p><hi>Ahaka&mdota;</hi>, <hi>ahake</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>;
  <lb><hi>ahake</hi> in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.aa>
<head>&Amacr;</head>

<p><hi>&Amacr;k&amacr;çabh&amacr;&sdotb;ita</hi>, a voice in the air, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;khy&amacr;na</hi>, theory of certain Vedic hymns, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>&ndash;3.

<pb n=395 id=pb395 facs="f:395"><p><hi>&Amacr;khy&amacr;yik&amacr;</hi>, romance, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;&nmacr;gik&amacr;bhinaya</hi>, expression by gesture, <ref target=pb367 type=pageref>367</ref>, <ref target=pb368 type=pageref>368</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;&ndotb;i</hi>, <hi>&amacr;ni</hi>, and <hi>&amacr;</hi> in neuter plural of a-stems, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;tmagatam</hi>, aside, <ref target=pb304 type=pageref>304</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;dhik&amacr;rika</hi>, principal (action), <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;nandakoça</hi>, a farce, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>, n. <ref target=n260.3 type=noteref>3</ref>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>, n. <ref target=n348.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;nandamañjar&imacr;</hi>, by Ghanaçy&amacr;ma, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;bh&imacr;r&imacr;</hi>, speech, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;ma</hi>, in assertions in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb120 type=pageref>120</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;mukha</hi>, introduction, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;y&amacr;ra&mdota;ga Sutta</hi>, <ref target=pb44 type=pageref>44</ref>, n. <ref target=n44.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;yukta</hi>, attendants, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;yu&sdotb;mant</hi>, as style of the king, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;rabha&tdotb;&imacr;</hi>, violent (manner), <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;rambha</hi>, voice testing by chorus, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;rambha</hi>, first stage of development in drama, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;rttha</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a for <hi>artha</hi>, <ref target=pb85 type=pageref>85</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;ryaputra</hi> (<hi>ajjaütt&amacr;</hi>), style of a husband, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;ry&amacr;</hi> (<hi>ajj&amacr;</hi>), style of a wife, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;ry&amacr;</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb124 type=pageref>124</ref>, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>, <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>, <ref target=pb181 type=pageref>181</ref>, <ref target=pb185 type=pageref>185</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>;
  <lb>appropriate to the erotic sentiment, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;lambana</hi>, fundamental determinants of sentiment, <ref target=pb315 type=pageref>315</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;vant&imacr;</hi>, a Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb333 type=pageref>333</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;çcaryamañjar&imacr;</hi>, by Çaktibhadra (BSOS. III. i. 116 f.), <ref target=pb371 type=pageref>371</ref>, n. <ref target=n371.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;çr&amacr;va&ndotb;&amacr;</hi>, trying of instruments, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;s&imacr;na</hi>, a kind of recitation, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>.

<p><hi>&Amacr;hi</hi>, as instrumental in <corr sic="&Amacr;çvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s">Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s</corr> Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.i>
<head>I</head>

<p><hi>Itih&amacr;sa</hi>, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>;
  <lb>Prof. Pischel&apos;s theory of the, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>.

<p><hi>Indravajr&amacr;</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>, <ref target=pb181 type=pageref>181</ref>, <ref target=pb185 type=pageref>185</ref>, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref>.

<p><hi>Iya&mdota;</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.ii>
<head>&Imacr;</head>


<p><hi>&Imacr;h&amacr;m&rdotb;ga</hi>, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>, <ref target=pb295 type=pageref>295</ref>, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.u>
<head>U</head>

<p><hi>Uktapratyukta</hi>, a duet, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>.

<p><hi>Ucca</hi>, used by K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>.

<p><hi>Utk&rdotb;ti</hi>, metre, appropriate to scenes of violence, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p><hi>Uttamottaka</hi>, a kind of song, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>.

<p><hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi>, by Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>, <ref target=pb139 type=pageref>139</ref>, <ref target=pb190 type=pageref>190</ref>&ndash;2, <ref target=pb194 type=pageref>194</ref>, <ref target=pb196 type=pageref>196</ref>, <ref target=pb199 type=pageref>199</ref>, <ref target=pb202 type=pageref>202</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>.

<p><hi>Utth&amacr;paka</hi>, challenge, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p><hi>Utpatti</hi>, production of sentiment, <ref target=pb317 type=pageref>317</ref>.

<p><hi>Utp&amacr;dya</hi>, invented (plot), <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>.

<p><hi>Uts&amacr;ha</hi>, energy, as basis of sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p><hi>Uts&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;ik&amacr;&nmacr;ka</hi>, a kind of drama, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>.

<p><hi>Udayanacarita</hi>, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>, <ref target=pb365 type=pageref>365</ref>.

<p><hi>Ud&amacr;tta</hi>, exalted (hero), <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>.

<p><hi>Ud&amacr;ttar&amacr;ghava</hi>, by M&amacr;yur&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb221 type=pageref>221</ref>, <ref target=pb223 type=pageref>223</ref>, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>.

<p><hi>Ud&amacr;rat&amacr; vacas&amacr;m</hi>, claimed by Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb196 type=pageref>196</ref>.

<p><hi>Ud&amacr;ratva</hi>, elevation of style, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p><hi>Udgh&amacr;tya</hi>, abrupt dialogue, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>;
  <lb>in the prologue, <ref target=pb341 type=pageref>341</ref>.

<p><hi>Udd&imacr;pana</hi>, excitant determinants, <ref target=pb315 type=pageref>315</ref>.

<p><hi>Uddhata</hi>, haughty (hero), <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>, and see <hi><corr sic="Dh&imacr;roddhatta">Dh&imacr;roddhata</corr></hi>.

<p><hi>Unmattaka</hi>, disguise of, adopted by Yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb108 type=pageref>108</ref>, <ref target=pb184 type=pageref>184</ref>, <ref target=pb185 type=pageref>185</ref>.

<p><hi>Unmattar&amacr;ghava</hi>, by Bh&amacr;skara Kavi, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>.

<p><hi>Upag&imacr;ti</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>.

<p><hi>Upaj&amacr;ti</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>.

<p><hi>Upan&amacr;garik&amacr;</hi>, style, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>, <ref target=pb333 type=pageref>333</ref>.

<p><hi>Upani&sdotb;ad</hi>, Theology, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p><hi>Upapati</hi>, adulterer, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>, n. <ref target=n307.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>Upapatti</hi>, use of argument, <ref target=pb330 type=pageref>330</ref>.

<p><hi>Upar&umacr;paka</hi>, minor dramatic forms, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>, <ref target=pb349 type=pageref>349</ref>&ndash;51.

<p><hi>Upasth&amacr;yika</hi>, eunuch, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>.

<p><hi>Ummadant&imacr;j&amacr;taka</hi>, alleged dramatic character of, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>, n. <ref target=n43.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>Ull&amacr;pya</hi>, a form of drama, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p><hi>U&sdotb;&ndotb;ih</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.uu>
<head>&Umacr;</head>

<p><hi>&Umacr;rubha&nmacr;ga</hi>, by Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb38 type=pageref>38</ref>, <ref target=pb94 type=pageref>94</ref>, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref>, <ref target=pb106 type=pageref>106</ref>, <ref target=pb114 type=pageref>114</ref>, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>, <ref target=pb300 type=pageref>300</ref>, <ref target=pb354 type=pageref>354</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.ri>
<head>&Rdotb;</head>

<p><hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi>, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb13 type=pageref>13</ref>, <ref target=pb15 type=pageref>15</ref>, <ref target=pb17 type=pageref>17</ref>, <ref target=pb18 type=pageref>18</ref>, <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref>, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>, <ref target=pb22 type=pageref>22</ref>, <ref target=pb23 type=pageref>23</ref>, <ref target=pb26 type=pageref>26</ref>.

<p><hi>&Rdotb;tusa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</hi>, by K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb147 type=pageref>147</ref>, n. <ref target=n147.3 type=noteref>3</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.e>
<head>E</head>

<p><hi>E</hi>, as masculine nominative of <hi>a</hi>-stems, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>.

<p><hi>Ek&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, by Vidy&amacr;dhara, <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref>.

<p><hi>Ekka</hi>, in Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p><hi>Edisa</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>.

<p><hi>Evva</hi>, <hi>evva&mdota;</hi>, in Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.ai>
<head>AI</head>

<p><hi>Ai</hi>, interjection, in Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>.

<p><hi>Aitareya Br&amacr;hma&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb77 type=pageref>77</ref>;
  <lb>tale of Çuna&hdotb;çepa, <ref target=pb22 type=pageref>22</ref>.

<p><hi>Aindraj&amacr;lika</hi>, juggler, <ref target=pb55 type=pageref>55</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.o>
<head>O</head>

<p><hi>Ojas</hi>, strength, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p><hi>O&ddotb;r&imacr;</hi>, speech, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.au>
<head>AU</head>

<p><hi>Aud&amacr;rya</hi>, nobility, as a quality of the hero, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>.

<p><hi>Aupacchandasika</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.k>
<head>K</head>

<p><hi>Ka</hi>, suffix, lengthening of vowel before, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>.

<p><hi>Ka&ndota;savadha</hi>, <ref target=pb37 type=pageref>37</ref>, <ref target=pb38 type=pageref>38</ref>.

<p><hi>Ka&ndota;savadha</hi>, by Çe&sdotb;ak&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>.

<p><hi>Kacci</hi>, in Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p><hi>Kañcukin</hi>, chamberlain, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>.

<p><hi>Ka&tdotb;hin&amacr;</hi>, style, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>, n. <ref target=n332.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<pb n=396 id=pb396 facs="f:396"><p><hi>Kathakas</hi>, reciters, <ref target=pb29 type=pageref>29</ref>, <ref target=pb30 type=pageref>30</ref>.

<p><hi>Kath&amacr;</hi>, tale, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>.

<p><hi>Kath&amacr;sarits&amacr;gara</hi>, by Somadeva, <ref target=pb52 type=pageref>52</ref>, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>, <ref target=pb134 type=pageref>134</ref>, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>.

<p><hi>Kathodgh&amacr;ta</hi>, form of prologue, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>.

<p><hi>Kadua</hi>, not in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p><hi>Kapphi&ndotb;&amacr;bhyudaya</hi>, poem by Çivasv&amacr;min, <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>, n. <ref target=n220.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>Kariya</hi>, gerund of <hi>k&rdotb;</hi> in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>.

<p><hi>Karu&ndotb;a</hi>, pathos, as a sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>.

<p><hi>Karu&ndotb;&amacr;kandala</hi>, <ref target=pb343 type=pageref>343</ref>, n. <ref target=n343.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>Karotha</hi>, anomalous strong form in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>.

<p><hi>Kar&ndotb;abh&amacr;ra</hi>, by Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref>, <ref target=pb106 type=pageref>106</ref>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p><hi>Kar&ndotb;asundar&imacr;</hi>, by Bilha&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>.

<p><hi>Karp&umacr;rcaritra</hi>, by Vatsar&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>.

<p><hi>Karp&umacr;ramañjar&imacr;</hi>, by R&amacr;jaçekhara, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref>, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>.

<p><hi>Kalah&amacr;ntarit&amacr;</hi>, type of heroine, <ref target=pb309 type=pageref>309</ref>.

<p><hi>Kaleti</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>.

<p><hi>K&amacr;dambar&imacr;</hi>, by B&amacr;&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>.

<p><hi>K&amacr;nti</hi>, beauty of style, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p><hi>K&amacr;mandak&imacr;ya N&imacr;tiç&amacr;stra</hi>, <ref target=pb291 type=pageref>291</ref>, n. <ref target=n291.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>K&amacr;maç&amacr;stra</hi>, by V&amacr;tsy&amacr;yana, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>, <ref target=pb285 type=pageref>285</ref>, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>.

<p><hi>K&amacr;rya</hi>, dénouement, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>.

<p><hi>K&amacr;la</hi>, equivalent to <hi>Hor&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>.

<p><hi>K&amacr;lan&amacr;</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>.

<p><hi>K&amacr;vya</hi>, as influencing drama, <ref target=pb283 type=pageref>283</ref>, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>.

<p><hi>K&amacr;vya</hi>, a type of drama, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p><hi>K&amacr;vyanir&ndotb;aya</hi>, by Dhanika, <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref><corr>.</corr>

<p><hi>K&amacr;vyaprak&amacr;ça</hi>, by Mamma&tdotb;a, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>, <ref target=pb295 type=pageref>295</ref>, n. <ref target=n295.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>K&amacr;vyam&imacr;m&amacr;&ndota;s&amacr;</hi>, by R&amacr;jaçekhara, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref>, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>, <ref target=pb288 type=pageref>288</ref>.

<p><hi>K&amacr;vy&amacr;darça</hi>, by Da&ndotb;&ddotb;in, <ref target=pb104 type=pageref>104</ref>.

<p><hi>K&amacr;çik&amacr; V&rdotb;tti</hi>, cites Candra&apos;s grammar, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>.

<p><hi>K&amacr;çir&amacr;jñe</hi>, irregular compounds in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p><hi>Kir&amacr;t&amacr;rjun&imacr;ya</hi>, by Bh&amacr;ravi, <ref target=pb194 type=pageref>194</ref>.

<p><hi>Kir&amacr;t&amacr;rjun&imacr;ya</hi>, by Vatsar&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>.

<p><hi>Kilakiñcita</hi>, hysteria, <ref target=pb310 type=pageref>310</ref><corr>.</corr>

<p><hi>Kiçça</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>.

<p><hi>Kissa</hi>, in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p><hi>K&imacr;rti</hi>, fame, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>.

<p><hi>K&imacr;rtikaumud&imacr;</hi>, by Someçvara, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>, n. <ref target=n248.7 type=noteref>7</ref>.

<p><hi>K&imacr;rtimañjar&imacr;</hi>, an allegorical character, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>.

<p><hi>Ku&tdotb;ila</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>.

<p><hi>Ku&tdotb;&tdotb;an&imacr;mata</hi>, by D&amacr;modaragupta, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>.

<p><hi>Ku&tdotb;&tdotb;amita</hi>, pretended anger, <ref target=pb310 type=pageref>310</ref>.

<p><hi>Kundam&amacr;l&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb341 type=pageref>341</ref>.

<p><hi>Kum&amacr;ra</hi>, prince royal, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>.

<p><hi>Kum&amacr;rasambhava</hi>, by K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb75 type=pageref>75</ref>, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>, <ref target=pb147 type=pageref>147</ref>, <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>, <ref target=pb285 type=pageref>285</ref>, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>, <ref target=pb352 type=pageref>352</ref>.

<p><hi>Kuç&imacr;lava</hi>, actor, <ref target=pb31 type=pageref>31</ref>, <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>.

<p><hi>K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;avijaya</hi>, by Ve&nmacr;ka&tdotb;avarada, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>.

<p><hi>K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;&amacr;bhyudaya</hi>, by Lokan&amacr;tha Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>.

<p><hi>Kaiçik&imacr;</hi> (&lsquo;of the Kaiçikas&rsquo;, Lévi, TI, i. 333), graceful (manner), <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p><hi>Komal&amacr;</hi>, style, <ref target=pb333 type=pageref>333</ref>.

<p><hi>Komudagandha</hi>, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>.

<p><hi>Kau&tdotb;il&imacr;ya Arthaç&amacr;stra</hi>, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>, <ref target=pb291 type=pageref>291</ref>, n. <ref target=n291.2 type=noteref>2</ref>, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>, <ref target=pb364 type=pageref>364</ref>.

<p><hi>Kautukaratn&amacr;kara</hi>, written under Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a M&amacr;&ndotb;ikyadeva, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p><hi>Kautukasarvasva</hi>, by Gop&imacr;n&amacr;tha Cakravartin, <ref target=pb262 type=pageref>262</ref>.

<p><hi>Kaumud&imacr;mitr&amacr;&ndotb;anda</hi>, by R&amacr;macandra, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>.

<p><hi>Krimi</hi>, Buddhist irregularity for <hi>k&rdotb;mi</hi>, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>.

<p><hi>Krodha</hi>, anger, as basis of sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p><hi>K&sdotb;</hi>, treatment of, in various Pr&amacr;krits, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>.

<p><hi>K&sdotb;obha</hi>, agitation of mind, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.kh>
<head>KH</head>

<p><hi>Kha&ndotb;&ddotb;ac&umacr;lik&amacr;</hi>, nature of, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>, n. <ref target=n302.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>Kha&ndotb;&ddotb;it&amacr;</hi>, enraged (heroine), <ref target=pb309 type=pageref>309</ref>.

<p><hi>Khu</hi>, after vowels in place of <hi>kkhu</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.g>
<head>G</head>

<p><hi>Gaü&ddotb;avaha</hi>, by V&amacr;kpati, <ref target=pb187 type=pageref>187</ref>.

<p><hi>Ga&nmacr;gad&amacr;saprat&amacr;pavil&amacr;sa</hi>, by Ga&nmacr;g&amacr;dhara, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>.

<p><hi>Gacchia</hi>, and <hi>gadua</hi> in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p><hi>Ga&ddotb;u</hi>, obscure term, <ref target=pb35 type=pageref>35</ref>.

<p><hi>Ga&ndotb;&ddotb;a</hi>, abrupt remark, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>.

<p><hi>Ga&ndotb;hadi</hi>, in Bh&amacr;sa for <hi>ge&ndotb;hadi</hi> in <corr sic="Açvaghosa">Açvagho&sdotb;a</corr>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p><hi>Gambh&imacr;rat&amacr;</hi>, depth, <ref target=pb226 type=pageref>226</ref>.

<p><hi>Garbha</hi>, third juncture, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>.

<p><hi>Garbh&amacr;&nmacr;ka</hi>, embryo act, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>.

<p><hi>Gah&imacr;ta&mdota;</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>.

<p><hi>G&amacr;mbh&imacr;rya</hi>, impassivity, as quality of the hero, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>.

<p><hi>G&imacr;tagovinda</hi>, by Jayadeva, <ref target=pb17 type=pageref>17</ref>, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref>, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref>, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>, n. <ref target=n339.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>G&imacr;ti</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>.

<p><hi>Gu&ndotb;a</hi>, excellencies, theory of, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>, <ref target=pb333 type=pageref>333</ref>, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>.

<p><hi>G&rdotb;hya</hi>, irregular form in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p><hi>Gai</hi>, sing, used of S&amacr;maveda, <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref>.

<p><hi>Gop&amacr;lakelicandrik&amacr;</hi>, by R&amacr;mak&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref>&ndash;4.

<p><hi>Go&sdotb;&tdotb;h&imacr;</hi>, a type of drama, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p><hi>Granthikas</hi>, reciters, <ref target=pb32 type=pageref>32</ref>&ndash;5, <ref target=pb38 type=pageref>38</ref>, <ref target=pb39 type=pageref>39</ref>, <ref target=pb45 type=pageref>45</ref>, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref>.

<p><hi>Granthin</hi>, owner of a book, <ref target=pb35 type=pageref>35</ref>, n. <ref target=n35.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.c>
<head>C</head>

<p><hi>Cakrav&amacr;ka</hi>, grief at separation from his mate, <ref target=pb169 type=pageref>169</ref>.

<p><hi>Ca&ndotb;&ddotb;akauçika</hi>, by K&sdotb;em&imacr;çvara, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref>, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>.

<p><hi>Candakinnaraj&amacr;taka</hi>, alleged dramatic character of, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>, n. <ref target=n43.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>C&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;&amacr;l&imacr;</hi>, a Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>.

<p><hi>C&amacr;ra&ndotb;a</hi>, actor, <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>.

<p><hi>C&amacr;r&imacr;</hi>, a dance, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>.

<pb n=397 id=pb397 facs="f:397"><p><hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi>, by Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb64 type=pageref>64</ref>, <ref target=pb65 type=pageref>65</ref>, <ref target=pb67 type=pageref>67</ref>, <ref target=pb85 type=pageref>85</ref>, <ref target=pb92 type=pageref>92</ref>, <ref target=pb93 type=pageref>93</ref>, <ref target=pb103 type=pageref>103</ref>, <ref target=pb104 type=pageref>104</ref>, <ref target=pb107 type=pageref>107</ref>, <ref target=pb116 type=pageref>116</ref>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>, <ref target=pb128 type=pageref>128</ref>, <ref target=pb130 type=pageref>130</ref>, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>.

<p><hi>Citrabh&amacr;rata</hi>, by K&sdotb;emendra, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>.

<p><hi>Citrayajña</hi>, by Vaidyan&amacr;tha V&amacr;caspati Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;&amacr;c&amacr;rya, <ref target=pb274 type=pageref>274</ref>, n. <ref target=n274.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb371 type=pageref>371</ref>, n. <ref target=n371.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>C&umacr;lik&amacr;</hi>, nature of, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>.

<p><hi>Ce&tdotb;a</hi>, servants, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>;
  <lb>speech of, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p><hi>Caitanyacandrodaya</hi>, by Kavikar&ndotb;ap&umacr;ra, <ref target=pb133 type=pageref>133</ref>, n. <ref target=n133.6 type=noteref>6</ref>, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>.

<p><hi>Cch</hi>, in M&amacr;gadh&imacr; as <hi>çc</hi>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.ch>
<head>CH</head>

<p><hi>Cha&ddotb;&ddotb;</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>.

<p><hi>Chaddantaj&amacr;taka</hi>, alleged dramatic character of, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>, n. <ref target=n43.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>Chala</hi>, cheating, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>.

<p><hi>Chalana</hi>, deception, <ref target=pb222 type=pageref>222</ref>.

<p><hi>Chalitar&amacr;ma</hi>, <ref target=pb223 type=pageref>223</ref>, <ref target=pb224 type=pageref>224</ref>, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>.

<p><hi>Ch&amacr;y&amacr;</hi>, Sanskrit version of Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>.

<p><hi>Ch&amacr;y&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, shadow drama, <ref target=pb55 type=pageref>55</ref>&ndash;7, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>, <ref target=pb276 type=pageref>276</ref>.

<p><hi>Ch&amacr;y&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;ya</hi>, shadow drama, <ref target=pb55 type=pageref>55</ref>, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.j>
<head>J</head>

<p><hi>Jagat&imacr;</hi>, metre, appropriate to lively dialogue, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p><hi>Jan&amacr;ntikam</hi>, in private conversation, <ref target=pb304 type=pageref>304</ref>.

<p><hi>Jarjara</hi>, banner (of Indra), <ref target=pb41 type=pageref>41</ref>, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>.

<p><hi>Javanik&amacr;</hi>, see <hi>Yavanik&amacr;</hi>.

<p><hi>Javanik&amacr;ntara</hi>, name of acts in the <hi>Sa&tdotb;&tdotb;aka</hi>, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>.

<p><hi>J&amacr;takas</hi>, <ref target=pb22 type=pageref>22</ref>, <ref target=pb23 type=pageref>23</ref>, n. <ref target=n23.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>J&amacr;nak&imacr;pari&ndotb;aya</hi>, by R&amacr;mabhadra D&imacr;k&sdotb;ita, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>, <ref target=pb361 type=pageref>361</ref>.

<p><hi>J&amacr;mitra</hi>, diameter, used by K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>.

<p><hi>J&amacr;y&amacr;j&imacr;va</hi>, one who lives on (the beauty) of his wife, <ref target=pb55 type=pageref>55</ref>.

<p><hi>J&imacr;v&amacr;nandana</hi>, by &Amacr;nandar&amacr;ya, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>.

<p><hi>Jugups&amacr;</hi>, disgust, as basis of sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p><hi>Jovvana</hi>, in Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p><hi>Jñ</hi>, treatment of, in Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p><hi>Jñ&amacr;nadarpa&ndotb;a</hi>, mirror of knowledge, as a character, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.tt>
<head>&Tdotb;</head>

<p><hi>&Tdotb;akk&imacr;</hi> or <hi>&Tdotb;&amacr;kk&imacr;</hi>, a Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.dd>
<head>&Ddotb;</head>

<p><hi>&Ddotb;amaruka</hi>, by Ghanaçy&amacr;ma, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>, n. <ref target=n257.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>&Ddotb;im</hi>, alleged root, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>.

<p><hi>&Ddotb;ima</hi>, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>, <ref target=pb292 type=pageref>292</ref>, <ref target=pb295 type=pageref>295</ref>, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>.

<p><hi>&Ddotb;ill&imacr;s&amacr;mr&amacr;jya</hi>, by Lak&sdotb;ma&ndotb;a S&umacr;ri, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.ddh>
<head>&Ddotb;H</head>

<p><hi><corr sic="Dhakk&imacr;">&Ddotb;hakk&imacr;</corr></hi>, a Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.nn>
<head>&Ndotb;</head>

<p><hi>&Ndotb;</hi>, and <hi>n</hi> in the Pr&amacr;krits, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>;
  <lb>as affecting the quality of style, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p><hi>&Ndotb;evaccha</hi>, see <hi>Nevaccha</hi>.

<p><hi>&Ndotb;y</hi>, altered to <hi>ññ</hi> or <hi>&ndotb;&ndotb;</hi> in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.t>
<head>T</head>

<p><hi>T</hi> normally retained in Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s Pr&amacr;krits, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>.

<p><hi>Tapat&imacr;sa&mdota;vara&ndotb;a</hi>, by Kulaçekharavarman, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>, n. <ref target=n342.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>Tamas</hi>, element of dullness, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>.

<p><hi>Tara&nmacr;gadatta</hi>, a <hi>Prakara&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>.

<p><hi>Tava</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>.

<p><hi>T&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;ava</hi>, dance, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>, <ref target=pb241 type=pageref>241</ref>, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>.

<p><hi>T&amacr;ta</hi>, as style of address, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>T&amacr;pasavatsar&amacr;jacarita</hi>, by Ana&nmacr;gahar&sdotb;a M&amacr;trar&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb220 type=pageref>220</ref>.

<p><hi>Tiraskara&ndotb;&imacr;</hi> or <hi>Tiraskari&ndotb;&imacr;</hi>, curtain, <ref target=pb359 type=pageref>359</ref>.

<p><hi>Tumh&amacr;ka&mdota;</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>.

<p><hi>Tulyadharma</hi>, irregular compound in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p><hi>Tuva&mdota;</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>.

<p><hi>Tejas</hi>, honour as a quality of the hero, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>.

<p><hi>To&tdotb;aka</hi>, see <hi>Tro&tdotb;aka</hi>.

<p><hi>Trigata</hi>, various senses of, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>, n. <ref target=n111.2 type=noteref>2</ref>, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>.

<p><hi>Trig&umacr;&ddotb;ha</hi>, a kind of song, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>.

<p><hi>Tripurad&amacr;ha</hi>, by Vatsar&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>.

<p><hi>Trim&umacr;&ddotb;haka</hi>, a kind of song, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>.

<p><hi>Tro&tdotb;aka</hi>, a type of drama, <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.th>
<head>TH</head>

<p><hi>Therag&amacr;th&amacr;</hi> (866 ff.), alleged dramatic character of, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>, n. <ref target=n43.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>Ther&imacr;g&amacr;th&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>, n. <ref target=n43.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb54 type=pageref>54</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.d>
<head>D</head>

<p><hi>Dak&sdotb;i&ndotb;a</hi>, courteous (hero), <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>.

<p><hi>Da&ndotb;&ddotb;aka</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>, <ref target=pb187 type=pageref>187</ref>, n. <ref target=n187.2 type=noteref>2</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>.

<p><hi>Dambha</hi>, falsity, as a character, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p><hi>Daridrac&amacr;rudatta</hi>, <ref target=pb104 type=pageref>104</ref>, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>, and see <hi>C&amacr;rudatta</hi>.

<p><hi>Darç</hi>, in Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p><hi>Daçakum&amacr;racarita</hi>, by Da&ndotb;&ddotb;in, <ref target=pb55 type=pageref>55</ref>, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>, <ref target=pb133 type=pageref>133</ref>, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>.

<p><hi>Daçar&umacr;pa</hi>, by Da&ndotb;&ddotb;in, <ref target=pb71 type=pageref>71</ref>, <ref target=pb169 type=pageref>169</ref>, <ref target=pb221 type=pageref>221</ref>, <ref target=pb223 type=pageref>223</ref>, <ref target=pb292 type=pageref>292</ref>, <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref>, <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>, <ref target=pb304 type=pageref>304</ref>, <ref target=pb315 type=pageref>315</ref>, <ref target=pb319 type=pageref>319</ref>, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>, <ref target=pb330 type=pageref>330</ref>, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>, <ref target=pb341 type=pageref>341</ref>, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>, <ref target=pb349 type=pageref>349</ref>.

<p><hi>Daçar&umacr;p&amacr;valoka</hi>, by Dhana&mdota;jaya, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>.

<p><hi>D&amacr;k&sdotb;i&ndotb;&amacr;ty&amacr;</hi>, a Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p><hi>D&amacr;nakelikaumud&imacr;</hi>, by R&umacr;pa Gosv&amacr;min, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>.

<p><hi>D&amacr;ni</hi>, <hi>d&amacr;&ndotb;i</hi>, Pr&amacr;krit forms, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>.

<p><hi>Dikp&amacr;lastuti</hi>, praise of the world guardians, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>.

<p><hi>Digvijaya</hi>, conquest of the earth, of Raghu, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>.

<p><hi>Dissadi</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>;
  <lb><hi>d&imacr;sadi</hi>, in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p><hi>D&imacr;paka</hi>, a figure of speech, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p><hi>D&imacr;ptarasa</hi>, sentiment of excitement, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>.

<p><hi>D&imacr;vyant</hi>, gamblers, speech of, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p><hi>Dugu&ndotb;a</hi>, irregular form in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>.

<p><hi>Durmallik&amacr;</hi>, a form of drama, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p><hi>Du&sdotb;&tdotb;a</hi>, a character in Buddhist drama, <ref target=pb74 type=pageref>74</ref>, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>;
  <lb>Pr&amacr;krit of, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>.

<p><hi>Duhit&rdotb;k&amacr;</hi>, puppet, <ref target=pb53 type=pageref>53</ref>.

<p><hi>D&umacr;ta</hi>, messenger, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>.

<p><hi>D&umacr;tagha&tdotb;otkaca</hi>, by Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb94 type=pageref>94</ref>, <ref target=pb97 type=pageref>97</ref>, <ref target=pb98 type=pageref>98</ref>, <ref target=pb106 type=pageref>106</ref>, <ref target=pb107 type=pageref>107</ref>.

<p><hi>D&umacr;tav&amacr;kya</hi>, by Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb73 type=pageref>73</ref>, <ref target=pb94 type=pageref>94</ref>, <ref target=pb106 type=pageref>106</ref>, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.

<pb n=398 id=pb398 facs="f:398"><p><hi>D&umacr;t&amacr;&nmacr;gada</hi>, by Dhana&mdota;jaya, <ref target=pb55 type=pageref>55</ref>, <ref target=pb56 type=pageref>56</ref>, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.

<p><hi>Deva</hi>, as style of the king, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>Dev&imacr;</hi>, queen, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>.

<p><hi>Devva</hi>, in Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p><hi>Deçabh&amacr;&sdotb;&amacr;</hi>, vernacular, when used, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>.

<p><hi>Do&sdotb;a</hi>, defects of style, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p><hi>Dy</hi>, represented in Açvagho&sdotb;a by <hi>yy</hi>, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>.

<p><hi>Dr&amacr;vi&ddotb;&imacr;</hi>, speech, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>.

<p><hi>Drutavilambita</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>, <ref target=pb181 type=pageref>181</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>.

<p><hi>Druti</hi>, melting, as a mental condition, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>.

<p><hi>Dvig&umacr;&ddotb;haka</hi>, harmonious song, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>.

<p><hi>Dvipad&amacr;s</hi>, music, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>.

<p><hi>Dvim&umacr;&ddotb;haka</hi>, a kind of song, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.dh>
<head>DH</head>

<p><hi>Dhana&mdota;jayajaya</hi>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>, n. <ref target=n347.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>Dhana&mdota;jayavijaya</hi>, by K&amacr;ñcana Pa&ndotb;&ddotb;ita, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>.

<p><hi>Dharmaçarm&amacr;bhyudaya</hi>, by Haricandra, <ref target=pb75 type=pageref>75</ref>, n. <ref target=n75.3 type=noteref>3</ref>.

<p><hi>Dharm&amacr;bhyudaya</hi>, by Meghaprabh&amacr;c&amacr;rya, <ref target=pb55 type=pageref>55</ref>, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>.

<p><hi>Dh&amacr;rakas</hi>, expounders of epic, <ref target=pb29 type=pageref>29</ref>.

<p><hi>Dh&imacr;ra</hi>, noble, as characteristic of heroes, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>.

<p><hi>Dh&imacr;ralalita</hi>, type of hero, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>.

<p><hi>Dh&imacr;raç&amacr;nta</hi>, type of hero, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>.

<p><hi>Dh&imacr;rod&amacr;tta</hi>, type of hero, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>.

<p><hi>Dh&imacr;roddhata</hi>, type of hero, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>;
  <lb>of enemy of hero, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>, <ref target=pb308 type=pageref>308</ref>.

<p><hi>Dh&umacr;rtanartaka</hi>, by S&amacr;mar&amacr;ja D&imacr;k&sdotb;ita, <ref target=pb262 type=pageref>262</ref>, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p><hi>Dh&umacr;rtas</hi>, gamblers or rogues, speech of, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p><hi>Dh&umacr;rtasam&amacr;gama</hi>, by Jyotir&imacr;çvara Kaviçekhara, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>.

<p><hi>Dh&rdotb;ti</hi>, firmness, as an allegorical character, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>.

<p><hi>Dh&rdotb;tir yavanik&amacr;y&amacr;&hdotb;</hi>, the holding apart of the curtain, <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>.

<p><hi>Dh&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;a</hi>, shameless (hero), <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>.

<p><hi>Dhruv&amacr;s</hi>, in music, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>.

<p><hi>Dhvajamaha</hi>, banner festival (of Indra), <ref target=pb41 type=pageref>41</ref>.

<p><hi>Dhvany&amacr;loka</hi>, by &Amacr;nandavardhana, <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.n>
<head>N</head>

<p><hi>N</hi> and <hi>&ndotb;</hi> in the Pr&amacr;krits, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p><hi>Nacca</hi>, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>.

<p><hi>Na&tdotb;a</hi>, actor, <ref target=pb25 type=pageref>25</ref>, <ref target=pb28 type=pageref>28</ref>, <ref target=pb31 type=pageref>31</ref>, <ref target=pb36 type=pageref>36</ref>, <ref target=pb45 type=pageref>45</ref>, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>, <ref target=pb50 type=pageref>50</ref>, <ref target=pb52 type=pageref>52</ref>, <ref target=pb67 type=pageref>67</ref>.

<p><hi>Na&tdotb;as&umacr;tras</hi>, in P&amacr;&ndotb;ini, <ref target=pb31 type=pageref>31</ref>, <ref target=pb290 type=pageref>290</ref>.

<p><hi>Na&tdotb;&imacr;</hi>, actress, <ref target=pb51 type=pageref>51</ref>, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>, <ref target=pb361 type=pageref>361</ref>.

<p><hi>Narku&tdotb;aka</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>.

<p><hi>Nartaka</hi>, dances, <ref target=pb28 type=pageref>28</ref>, <ref target=pb29 type=pageref>29</ref>, <ref target=pb50 type=pageref>50</ref>.

<p><hi>Narmagarbha</hi>, development of affection, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p><hi>Narman</hi>, pleasantry, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>.

<p><hi>Narmasuh&rdotb;d</hi>, boon companion, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>.

<p><hi>Narmasphañja</hi>, outburst of affection, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref><corr>.</corr>

<p><hi>Narmaspho&tdotb;a</hi>, manifestation of affection, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p><hi>Navagrahacarita</hi>, by Ghanaçy&amacr;ma, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>, n. <ref target=n345.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>Navas&amacr;has&amacr;&nmacr;kacarita</hi>, by Padmagupta, <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref>.

<p><hi>N&amacr;garaka</hi>, character of, <ref target=pb285 type=pageref>285</ref>;
  <lb>speech of, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>.

<p><hi>N&amacr;g&amacr;nanda</hi>, by Har&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>, <ref target=pb85 type=pageref>85</ref>, <ref target=pb170 type=pageref>170</ref>, <ref target=pb174 type=pageref>174</ref>, <ref target=pb175 type=pageref>175</ref>, <ref target=pb180 type=pageref>180</ref>, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>, <ref target=pb284 type=pageref>284</ref>, <ref target=pb286 type=pageref>286</ref>, <ref target=pb300 type=pageref>300</ref>, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>, n. <ref target=n339.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>, n. <ref target=n344.2 type=noteref>2</ref>, <ref target=pb371 type=pageref>371</ref>, n. <ref target=n371.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, a type of drama, <ref target=pb28 type=pageref>28</ref>, <ref target=pb29 type=pageref>29</ref>, <ref target=pb95 type=pageref>95</ref>, <ref target=pb244 type=pageref>244</ref>&ndash;56, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>, <ref target=pb352 type=pageref>352</ref>, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>.

<p><hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;akacandrik&amacr;</hi>, by R&umacr;pa Gosv&amacr;min, <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>.

<p><hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;ak&amacr;la&mdota;k&amacr;ra</hi>, dramatic ornaments, <ref target=pb330 type=pageref>330</ref>, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p><hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, type of drama, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>, <ref target=pb63 type=pageref>63</ref>, <ref target=pb71 type=pageref>71</ref>, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>, <ref target=pb279 type=pageref>279</ref>, <ref target=pb280 type=pageref>280</ref>, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>, <ref target=pb349 type=pageref>349</ref>, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>.

<p><hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;&imacr;</hi>, type of drama, <ref target=pb349 type=pageref>349</ref>.

<p><hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;ya</hi>, drama, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>.

<p><hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaprad&imacr;pa</hi>, by Sundaramiçra, <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>.

<p><hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yar&amacr;saka</hi>, a ballet, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p><hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb36 type=pageref>36</ref>, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>, <ref target=pb51 type=pageref>51</ref>, <ref target=pb65 type=pageref>65</ref>, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>, <ref target=pb75 type=pageref>75</ref>, n. <ref target=n75.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb81 type=pageref>81</ref>, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>, <ref target=pb95 type=pageref>95</ref>, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb244 type=pageref>244</ref>, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>, <ref target=pb289 type=pageref>289</ref>&ndash;92, <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref>, <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>, <ref target=pb295 type=pageref>295</ref>, <ref target=pb304 type=pageref>304</ref>, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>, <ref target=pb315 type=pageref>315</ref>, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>, <ref target=pb324 type=pageref>324</ref>, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>, <ref target=pb330 type=pageref>330</ref>, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>, <ref target=pb341 type=pageref>341</ref>, <ref target=pb343 type=pageref>343</ref>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>, <ref target=pb349 type=pageref>349</ref>, <ref target=pb352 type=pageref>352</ref>, <ref target=pb355 type=pageref>355</ref>, <ref target=pb358 type=pageref>358</ref>, <ref target=pb362 type=pageref>362</ref>, <ref target=pb364 type=pageref>364</ref>, <ref target=pb367 type=pageref>367</ref>, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>.

<p><hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;y&amacr;c&amacr;rya</hi>, professor, <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>.

<p><hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;y&amacr;la&mdota;k&amacr;ra</hi>, dramatic ornaments, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>, <ref target=pb330 type=pageref>330</ref>.

<p><hi>N&amacr;nd&imacr;</hi>, benediction at beginning of play, <ref target=pb85 type=pageref>85</ref>, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>, <ref target=pb126 type=pageref>126</ref>, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>, <ref target=pb204 type=pageref>204</ref>, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref>, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>, <ref target=pb343 type=pageref>343</ref>, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>;
  <lb>pronounced behind the scenes in the <hi>Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi>, the <hi>Vy&amacr;yoga</hi>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>;
  <lb>the <hi>Pre&nmacr;kha&ndotb;a</hi> or <hi>Prek&sdotb;a&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p><hi>N&amacr;yaka</hi>, hero, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>, <ref target=pb85 type=pageref>85</ref>, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>&ndash;7.

<p><hi>N&amacr;yik&amacr;</hi>, heroine, <ref target=pb308 type=pageref>308</ref>&ndash;10.

<p><hi>N&amacr;lik&amacr;</hi>, enigma, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>.

<p><hi>Nikkhanta</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>.

<p><hi>Nidarçan&amacr;</hi>, a figure, <ref target=pb125 type=pageref>125</ref>.

<p><hi>Niyat&amacr;pti</hi>, fourth stage of development in drama, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>.

<p><hi>Niruss&amacr;sa&mdota;</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>.

<p><hi>Nirbhayabh&imacr;ma</hi>, by R&amacr;macandra, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>.

<p><hi>Nirmu&ndotb;&ddotb;a</hi>, eunuch, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>.

<p><hi>Nirvaha&ndotb;a</hi>, conclusion, as last juncture, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>.

<p><hi>Nirveda</hi>, indifference, as basis of sentiment, <ref target=pb324 type=pageref>324</ref>.

<p><hi>N&rdotb;t</hi>, dance, origin of <hi>Na&tdotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb57 type=pageref>57</ref>.

<p><hi>N&rdotb;tu</hi>, dancer, <ref target=pb25 type=pageref>25</ref>, n. <ref target=n25.7 type=noteref>7</ref>.

<p><hi>N&rdotb;tta</hi>, dance, <ref target=pb25 type=pageref>25</ref>, n. <ref target=n25.7 type=noteref>7</ref>, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>.

<p><hi>N&rdotb;tya</hi>, pantomime, <ref target=pb275 type=pageref>275</ref>, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>.

<p><hi>Nepathya</hi>, as form of sentiment, <ref target=pb315 type=pageref>315</ref>, n. <ref target=n315.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb368 type=pageref>368</ref>.

<p><hi>Nepathyag&rdotb;ha</hi>, tiring room, <ref target=pb54 type=pageref>54</ref>, <ref target=pb359 type=pageref>359</ref>, <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>.

<pb n=399 id=pb399 facs="f:399"><p><hi>Nepathyokti</hi>, a voice from behind the scene, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>.

<p><hi>Nevaccha</hi> (<hi>&Ndotb;evaccha</hi>), Pr&amacr;krit equivalent of <hi>Nepathya</hi>, <ref target=pb54 type=pageref>54</ref>.

<p><hi>Naip&amacr;&tdotb;hya</hi>, alleged origin of <hi>Nepathya</hi>, <ref target=pb54 type=pageref>54</ref>.

<p><hi>Nai&sdotb;adh&amacr;nanda</hi>, by K&sdotb;em&imacr;çvara, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>, <ref target=pb241 type=pageref>241</ref>.

<p><hi>Ny</hi>, altered to <hi>ññ</hi> in Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s Pr&amacr;krit, to <hi>ññ</hi> or <hi>&ndotb;&ndotb;</hi> in Bh&amacr;sa;
  <lb>to <hi>&ndotb;&ndotb;</hi> in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>;
  <lb>to <hi>ññ</hi> in the <hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.p>
<head>P</head>

<p><hi>Pañcar&amacr;tra</hi> (ed., with trans. by W. G. Urdhwareshe, Indore, 1920), by Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb94 type=pageref>94</ref>, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>, <ref target=pb112 type=pageref>112</ref>, <ref target=pb119 type=pageref>119</ref>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>, n. <ref target=n344.2 type=noteref>2</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>.

<p><hi>Pa&tdotb;&imacr;</hi>, curtain, <ref target=pb61 type=pageref>61</ref>, <ref target=pb389 type=pageref>389</ref>.

<p><hi>Pat&amacr;k&amacr;</hi>, episode, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>;
  <lb>subjunctures of, <ref target=pb290 type=pageref>290</ref>.

<p><hi>Pat&amacr;k&amacr;sth&amacr;naka</hi>, pro-episode, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>, <ref target=pb304 type=pageref>304</ref>.

<p><hi>Padas</hi>, number of, in prologue, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>.

<p><hi>Padh&amacr;nasutta</hi>, alleged dramatic character of, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>, n. <ref target=n43.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>Pabbajj&amacr;sutta</hi>, alleged dramatic character of, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>, n. <ref target=n43.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>Parivartaka</hi>, change of action, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p><hi>Paru&sdotb;&amacr;</hi>, style, <ref target=pb333 type=pageref>333</ref>.

<p><hi>Palinata</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a for <hi>pari&ndotb;ata</hi>, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>.

<p><hi>P&amacr;ñc&amacr;l&imacr;</hi>, (puppet) from Pañc&amacr;la, <ref target=pb53 type=pageref>53</ref>.

<p><hi>P&amacr;&tdotb;hakas</hi>, repeaters of epic passages, <ref target=pb29 type=pageref>29</ref>.

<p><hi>P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;av&amacr;nanda</hi>, <ref target=pb224 type=pageref>224</ref>.

<p><hi>P&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;av&amacr;bhyudaya</hi>, by Vy&amacr;sa Çr&imacr;r&amacr;madeva, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.

<p><hi>P&amacr;tra</hi>, character, <ref target=pb310 type=pageref>310</ref>.

<p><hi>P&amacr;dav&amacr;kyapram&amacr;&ndotb;ajña</hi>, sense of, <ref target=pb186 type=pageref>186</ref>.

<p><hi>P&amacr;rip&amacr;rçvika</hi>, attendant, <ref target=pb85 type=pageref>85</ref>, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>.

<p><hi>P&amacr;rthapar&amacr;krama</hi>, by Prahl&amacr;dana, <ref target=pb83 type=pageref>83</ref>, n. <ref target=n83.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>, <ref target=pb341 type=pageref>341</ref>, n. <ref target=n341.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>P&amacr;rvat&imacr;pari&ndotb;aya</hi>, by V&amacr;mana Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a B&amacr;&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb221 type=pageref>221</ref>, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb300 type=pageref>300</ref>.

<p><hi>P&imacr;&tdotb;hamarda</hi>, companion of the hero, <ref target=pb308 type=pageref>308</ref>, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p><hi>P&imacr;&tdotb;hamardik&amacr;</hi>, confidante of the heroine, <ref target=pb308 type=pageref>308</ref>.

<p><hi>Puttal&imacr;</hi>, <hi>Puttalik&amacr;</hi>, puppet, <ref target=pb53 type=pageref>53</ref>.

<p><hi>Putraka</hi>, puppet, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>.

<p><hi>Putrik&amacr;</hi>, puppet, <ref target=pb53 type=pageref>53</ref>.

<p><hi>Pupph&amacr;</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>.

<p><hi>Puruva</hi>, in Bh&amacr;sa for <hi>p&umacr;rva</hi>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p><hi>Purusa</hi>, in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p><hi>Pu&sdotb;paga&ndotb;&ddotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, a kind of song, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>.

<p><hi>Pu&sdotb;pad&umacr;&sdotb;itaka</hi>, a <hi>Prakara&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>.

<p><hi>Pu&sdotb;pabh&umacr;&sdotb;ita</hi>, a <hi>Prakara&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>.

<p><hi>Pu&sdotb;pit&amacr;gr&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>.

<p><hi>Pusta</hi>, stage properties, <ref target=pb365 type=pageref>365</ref>.

<p><hi>P&umacr;rvara&nmacr;ga</hi>, preliminaries of drama, <ref target=pb292 type=pageref>292</ref>, <ref target=pb341 type=pageref>341</ref>, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>.

<p><hi>P&rdotb;thiv&imacr;</hi>, in the <hi>Uttarar&amacr;macarita</hi>, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>.

<p><hi>P&rdotb;thv&imacr;</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>, <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>, <ref target=pb181 type=pageref>181</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>, <ref target=pb238 type=pageref>238</ref>.

<p><hi>Pekkh&amacr;</hi>, spectacle, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>.

<p><hi>Paiç&amacr;c&imacr;</hi>, a Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p><hi>Prakara&ndotb;a</hi>, a type of drama, <ref target=pb82 type=pageref>82</ref>, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>, <ref target=pb187 type=pageref>187</ref>, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>&ndash;61, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>, <ref target=pb280 type=pageref>280</ref>, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>.

<p><hi>Prakara&ndotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, a type of drama, <ref target=pb349 type=pageref>349</ref>, n. <ref target=n349.4 type=noteref>4</ref>, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>.

<p><hi>Prakar&imacr;</hi>, incident, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>.

<p><hi>Prakhy&amacr;ta</hi>, traditional (plot), <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>.

<p><hi>Pragalbh&amacr;</hi>, bold (heroine), <ref target=pb308 type=pageref>308</ref>.

<p><hi>Praca&ndotb;&ddotb;ap&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;ava</hi>, see <hi>B&amacr;labh&amacr;rata</hi>.

<p><hi>Pracchedaka</hi>, a kind of song, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>.

<p><hi>Prat&amacr;pa</hi>, valour, as a character, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>.

<p><hi>Prat&amacr;parudrakaly&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi>, by Vidy&amacr;n&amacr;tha, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>.

<p><hi>Prat&amacr;parudr&imacr;ya</hi>, by Vidy&amacr;n&amacr;tha, <ref target=pb293 type=pageref>293</ref>.

<p><hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, by Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb93 type=pageref>93</ref>, <ref target=pb94 type=pageref>94</ref>, <ref target=pb95 type=pageref>95</ref>, <ref target=pb108 type=pageref>108</ref>, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>, <ref target=pb113 type=pageref>113</ref>, <ref target=pb114 type=pageref>114</ref>, <ref target=pb118 type=pageref>118</ref>, <ref target=pb119 type=pageref>119</ref>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>, <ref target=pb130 type=pageref>130</ref>, <ref target=pb185 type=pageref>185</ref>, n. <ref target=n185.2 type=noteref>2</ref>, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>, n. <ref target=n335.3 type=noteref>3</ref>, <ref target=pb371 type=pageref>371</ref>, n. <ref target=n371.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>Pratin&amacr;yaka</hi>, the enemy of the hero, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>, <ref target=pb308 type=pageref>308</ref>.

<p><hi>Pratim&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, by Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb94 type=pageref>94</ref>, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>, <ref target=pb117 type=pageref>117</ref>, <ref target=pb124 type=pageref>124</ref>, <ref target=pb125 type=pageref>125</ref>.

<p><hi>Pratimukha</hi>, second juncture, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>.

<p><hi>Pratis&imacr;r&amacr;</hi>, curtain, <ref target=pb359 type=pageref>359</ref>.

<p><hi>Prat&imacr;g&rdotb;h&imacr;ta</hi>, irregular form in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>.

<p><hi>Prat&imacr;ti</hi>, apprehension of sentiment, <ref target=pb317 type=pageref>317</ref>.

<p><hi>Prat&imacr;h&amacr;r&imacr;</hi>, door-keeper, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>.

<p><hi>Praty&amacr;yati</hi>, irregular form in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p><hi>Prathamakalpa</hi>, misunderstood term, <ref target=pb112 type=pageref>112</ref>, n. <ref target=n112.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>Praty&amacr;h&amacr;ra</hi>, beat of drum to begin performance, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>.

<p><hi>Pradyumn&amacr;bhyudaya</hi>, by Ravivarman, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>.

<p><hi>Pradve&sdotb;am</hi>, Buddhist irregularity for <hi>prado&sdotb;am</hi>, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>.

<p><hi>Prapañca</hi>, comic dialogue, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>.

<p><hi>Prabuddharauhi&ndotb;eya</hi>, by R&amacr;mabhadra Muni, <ref target=pb259 type=pageref>259</ref>, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>.

<p><hi>Prabodha</hi>, knowledge, as a character, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>.

<p><hi>Prabodhacandrodaya</hi>, by K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;amiçra, <ref target=pb55 type=pageref>55</ref>, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>, <ref target=pb112 type=pageref>112</ref>, <ref target=pb243 type=pageref>243</ref>, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>&ndash;3, <ref target=pb286 type=pageref>286</ref>, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>, n. <ref target=n325.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>.

<p><hi>Prayatna</hi>, second stage of development of drama, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>.

<p><hi>Prayog&amacr;tiçaya</hi>, form of prologue, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>.

<p><hi>Prarocan&amacr;</hi>, part of preliminaries, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>,  <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>, <ref target=pb341 type=pageref>341</ref>, <ref target=pb343 type=pageref>343</ref>;
  <lb>pronounced behind the scenes, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p><hi>Prav&rdotb;ttaka</hi>, form of prologue, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>.

<p><hi>Praveçaka</hi>, introductory scene, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>, <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>.

<p><hi>Prasannar&amacr;ghava</hi>, by Jayadeva, <ref target=pb109 type=pageref>109</ref>, <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>, <ref target=pb226 type=pageref>226</ref>, <ref target=pb244 type=pageref>244</ref>&ndash;6, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref>.

<p><hi>Pras&amacr;da</hi>, clearness, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p><hi>Prast&amacr;van&amacr;</hi>, prologue, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>.

<p><hi>Prasth&amacr;na</hi>, a form of drama, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p><hi>Prahar&sdotb;i&ndotb;&imacr;</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>, <ref target=pb181 type=pageref>181</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>.

<pb n=400 id=pb400 facs="f:400"><p><hi>Prahasana</hi>, farce, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>&ndash;5, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>&ndash;3, <ref target=pb280 type=pageref>280</ref>, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>, <ref target=pb309 type=pageref>309</ref>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>.

<p><hi>Pr&amacr;cy&amacr;</hi>, a Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p><hi>Pr&amacr;&ddotb;viv&amacr;ka</hi>, judge, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>.

<p><hi>Pr&amacr;pty&amacr;ç&amacr;</hi>, third stage of development of drama, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>.

<p><hi>Pr&amacr;çnika</hi>, critic, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p><hi>Pr&amacr;sa&nmacr;gika</hi>, incidental (action), <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>.

<p><hi>Priyadarçik&amacr;</hi>, by Har&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb170 type=pageref>170</ref>, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>, <ref target=pb174 type=pageref>174</ref>, <ref target=pb175 type=pageref>175</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>, <ref target=pb362 type=pageref>362</ref>, <ref target=pb364 type=pageref>364</ref>, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>.

<p><hi>Prek&sdotb;aka</hi>, spectator, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p><hi>Prek&sdotb;a&ndotb;a</hi>, a form of drama, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p><hi>Prek&sdotb;a&ndotb;aka</hi>, a form of drama, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>.

<p><hi>Pre&nmacr;kha&ndotb;a</hi>, a form of drama, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p><hi>Pro&sdotb;itapriy&amacr;</hi>, type of heroine, <ref target=pb309 type=pageref>309</ref>.

<p><hi>Prau&ddotb;hatva</hi>, of style, claimed by Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb196 type=pageref>196</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.ph>
<head>PH</head>

<p><hi>Phal&amacr;gama</hi>, attainment of end in drama, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.b>
<head>B</head>

<p><hi>Bakulav&imacr;th&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb349 type=pageref>349</ref>.

<p><hi>Bambha&ndotb;a</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>.

<p><hi>B&amacr;&ddotb;ham</hi>, indicating assent, in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb120 type=pageref>120</ref>.

<p><hi>B&amacr;lacarita</hi> (ed. and trs. by H. Weller, Leipzig, 1922), by Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb38 type=pageref>38</ref>, <ref target=pb94 type=pageref>94</ref>, <ref target=pb98 type=pageref>98</ref>&ndash;100, <ref target=pb104 type=pageref>104</ref>, <ref target=pb106 type=pageref>106</ref>, <ref target=pb112 type=pageref>112</ref>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>.

<p><hi>B&amacr;labh&amacr;rata</hi>, or <hi>Praca&ndotb;&ddotb;ap&amacr;&ndotb;&ddotb;ava</hi>, by R&amacr;jaçekhara, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>.

<p><hi>B&amacr;lar&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, by R&amacr;jaçekhara, <ref target=pb52 type=pageref>52</ref>, <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>, <ref target=pb269 type=pageref>269</ref>, n. <ref target=n269.2 type=noteref>2</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>, <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>, <ref target=pb365 type=pageref>365</ref>.

<p><hi>B&amacr;lh&imacr;k&amacr;</hi> (<hi>B&amacr;hl&imacr;k&amacr;</hi>), speech of Khasas, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>.

<p><hi>Bindu</hi>, second element of the plot, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>.

<p><hi>Bibboka</hi>, affected indifference, <ref target=pb310 type=pageref>310</ref>.

<p><hi>B&imacr;ja</hi>, first element of the plot, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>.

<p><hi>B&imacr;bhatsa</hi>, horror, as a sentiment, <ref target=pb319 type=pageref>319</ref>, <ref target=pb324 type=pageref>324</ref>.

<p><hi>Buddhacarita</hi>, by Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb80 type=pageref>80</ref>, <ref target=pb81 type=pageref>81</ref>, <ref target=pb82 type=pageref>82</ref>.

<p><hi>Buddhi</hi>, wisdom, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>.

<p><hi>B&rdotb;hatkath&amacr;</hi>, by Gu&ndotb;&amacr;&ddotb;hya, <ref target=pb52 type=pageref>52</ref>, <ref target=pb102 type=pageref>102</ref>, <ref target=pb133 type=pageref>133</ref>, <ref target=pb174 type=pageref>174</ref>;
  <lb>why written in <hi>Paiç&amacr;c&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.bh>
<head>BH</head>

<p><hi>Bhakti</hi>, trust (in Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u), as a character, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>.

<p><hi>Bhagavant</hi>, as style of address, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>Bhagav&amacr;&mdota;</hi>, Buddhist irregularity for <hi>bhagav&amacr;n</hi>, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>.

<p><hi>Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a</hi>, as style of the king, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;&amacr;</hi>, vocative of <hi>bhart&rdotb;</hi> in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>.

<p><hi>Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;id&amacr;laka</hi>, style of princes of the blood, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>, and see <hi>Bhart&rdotb;d&amacr;raka</hi>.

<p><hi>Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;in&imacr;</hi>, style of the queen, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>Bha&ndotb;</hi>, conjugated in the 9th class, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>.

<p><hi>Bhadradatta</hi>, as style of Çakas, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>Bhadramukha</hi>, title in dramas, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>, <ref target=pb71 type=pageref>71</ref>, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>Bhaya</hi>, terror, as basis of sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p><hi>Bhay&amacr;naka</hi>, fear, as a sentiment, <ref target=pb319 type=pageref>319</ref>, <ref target=pb324 type=pageref>324</ref>.

<p><hi>Bharatav&amacr;kya</hi>, at close of the drama, <ref target=pb82 type=pageref>82</ref>, <ref target=pb83 type=pageref>83</ref>, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>.

<p><hi>Bhart&rdotb;d&amacr;raka</hi>, style of princes of the blood, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>, and see <hi>Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;id&amacr;laka</hi>.

<p><hi>Bhart&rdotb;d&amacr;rik&amacr;</hi>, style of a princess, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>Bhart&rdotb;harinirveda</hi>, by Harihara, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>.

<p><hi>Bhavat&imacr;</hi> (Pr&amacr;krit, <hi>bhodi</hi>), as style of the queen and her ladies, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>Bhav&amacr;&mdota;</hi>, as nominative in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>.

<p><hi>Bh&amacr;gavata Pur&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref>, <ref target=pb274 type=pageref>274</ref>.

<p><hi>Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi>, monologue, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>, <ref target=pb280 type=pageref>280</ref>, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>.

<p><hi>Bh&amacr;&ndotb;ik&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p><hi>Bh&amacr;rata</hi>, a rhapsode or comedian, <ref target=pb29 type=pageref>29</ref>, <ref target=pb30 type=pageref>30</ref>.

<p><hi>Bh&amacr;rat&imacr;</hi>, verbal (manner), <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>;
  <lb>in the <hi>Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>.

<p><hi>Bh&amacr;rat&imacr;ya N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>, see <hi>N&amacr;&tdotb;yaç&amacr;stra</hi>.

<p><hi>Bh&amacr;va</hi>, emotion, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>, <ref target=pb309 type=pageref>309</ref>, <ref target=pb316 type=pageref>316</ref>, <ref target=pb319 type=pageref>319</ref>.

<p><hi>Bh&amacr;va</hi>, mode of address, <ref target=pb361 type=pageref>361</ref>.

<p><hi>Bh&amacr;vaka</hi>, man of taste, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>, n. <ref target=n318.3 type=noteref>3</ref>.

<p><hi>Bh&amacr;vakatva</hi>, power of realization, <ref target=pb317 type=pageref>317</ref>.

<p><hi>Bh&amacr;san&amacr;&tdotb;akacakra</hi>, <ref target=pb92 type=pageref>92</ref>, n. <ref target=n92.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>Bhikkhun&imacr;sa&mdota;yutta</hi>, alleged dramatic character of, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>, n. <ref target=n43.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>Bh&imacr;mavikramavy&amacr;yoga</hi>, by Mok&sdotb;&amacr;ditya, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>.

<p><hi>Bhuktiv&amacr;da</hi>, doctrine of the enjoyment of sentiment, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>.

<p><hi>Bhuja&nmacr;gapray&amacr;ta</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>.

<p><hi>Bhu&mdota;jitaye</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>.

<p><hi>Bhuvan&amacr;bhyudaya</hi>, by Ça&nmacr;kuka, <ref target=pb291 type=pageref>291</ref>.

<p><hi>Bh&umacr;tabh&amacr;&sdotb;&amacr;</hi>, use of, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>.

<p><hi>Bhairav&amacr;nanda</hi>, by Ma&ndotb;ika, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>.

<p><hi>Bhogin&imacr;</hi>, concubine, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>.

<p><hi>Bhojakatva</hi>, power of enjoyment, <ref target=pb317 type=pageref>317</ref>.

<p><hi>Bhojacarita</hi>, by Ved&amacr;ntav&amacr;g&imacr;ça, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>.

<p><hi>Bhr&umacr;ku&ndota;sa</hi>, man playing female part, <ref target=pb36 type=pageref>36</ref>, <ref target=pb362 type=pageref>362</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.m>
<head>M</head>

<p><hi>Makka&tdotb;aho</hi>, dubious form in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>.

<p><hi>Mati</hi>, reason, as a character, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p><hi>Matta</hi>, in Bh&amacr;sa, later <hi>metta</hi>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p><hi>Mattavil&amacr;sa</hi>, by Mahendravikramavarman, <ref target=pb93 type=pageref>93</ref>, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>&ndash;5.

<p><hi>Matsya Pur&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb156 type=pageref>156</ref>.

<p><hi>Mada</hi>, intoxication, as an internal juncture, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>.

<p><hi>Madd</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>.

<p><hi>Madhyamavy&amacr;yoga</hi>, by Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb94 type=pageref>94</ref>, <ref target=pb106 type=pageref>106</ref>, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>.

<p><hi>Madhy&amacr;</hi>, partly experienced (heroine), <ref target=pb308 type=pageref>308</ref>.

<p><hi>Mantr&amacr;&nmacr;kan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, Act III of the <hi>Pratijñ&amacr;yaugandhar&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb371 type=pageref>371</ref>, n. <ref target=n371.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>Mantrin</hi>, minister, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>.

<p><hi>Mand&amacr;kr&amacr;nt&amacr;</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>.

<p><hi>Manmathonmathana</hi>, by R&amacr;ma, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>.

<p><hi>Mallik&amacr;m&amacr;ruta</hi>, by Udda&ndotb;&ddotb;in or Udda&ndotb;&ddotb;an&amacr;tha, <ref target=pb221 type=pageref>221</ref>, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>.

<p><hi>Mahattar&amacr;</hi>, duenna, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>.

<p><hi>Mah&amacr;janakaj&amacr;taka</hi>, alleged dramatic character of, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>, n. <ref target=n43.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<pb n=401 id=pb401 facs="f:401"><p><hi>Mah&amacr;dev&imacr;</hi>, chief queen, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>.

<p><hi>Mah&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, type of drama, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>.

<p><hi>Mah&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi> or <hi>Hanumann&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, <ref target=pb56 type=pageref>56</ref>, <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>, <ref target=pb244 type=pageref>244</ref>, n. <ref target=n244.2 type=noteref>2</ref>, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>&ndash;2, <ref target=pb273 type=pageref>273</ref>, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>.

<p><hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;rata</hi>, <ref target=pb52 type=pageref>52</ref>, <ref target=pb54 type=pageref>54</ref>, <ref target=pb95 type=pageref>95</ref>, n. <ref target=n95.2 type=noteref>2</ref>, <ref target=pb97 type=pageref>97</ref>, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>, <ref target=pb157 type=pageref>157</ref>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>.

<p><hi>Mah&amacr;bh&amacr;&sdotb;ya</hi>, <ref target=pb28 type=pageref>28</ref>, <ref target=pb36 type=pageref>36</ref>, <ref target=pb45 type=pageref>45</ref>, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>, <ref target=pb49 type=pageref>49</ref>, <ref target=pb53 type=pageref>53</ref>, <ref target=pb56 type=pageref>56</ref>, <ref target=pb57 type=pageref>57</ref>, <ref target=pb58 type=pageref>58</ref>, <ref target=pb71 type=pageref>71</ref>, <ref target=pb362 type=pageref>362</ref>, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>;
  <lb>evidence of, as to existence of the drama, <ref target=pb31 type=pageref>31</ref>&ndash;3.

<p><hi>Mah&amacr;y&amacr;naçraddhotp&amacr;da</hi>, by Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb80 type=pageref>80</ref>.

<p><hi>Mah&amacr;va&ndota;sa</hi>, <ref target=pb44 type=pageref>44</ref>.

<p><hi>Mah&amacr;v&imacr;racarita</hi>, by Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb187 type=pageref>187</ref>, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>, <ref target=pb194 type=pageref>194</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>, <ref target=pb228 type=pageref>228</ref>, <ref target=pb229 type=pageref>229</ref>, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>, n. <ref target=n344.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>.

<p><hi>M&amacr;</hi>, with the gerund, in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p><hi>M&amacr;gadh&imacr;</hi>, a Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb70 type=pageref>70</ref>, <ref target=pb74 type=pageref>74</ref>, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>, <ref target=pb185 type=pageref>185</ref>, <ref target=pb211 type=pageref>211</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>, <ref target=pb287 type=pageref>287</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p><hi>M&amacr;dhurya</hi>, grace as a quality of the hero, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>.

<p><hi>M&amacr;dhurya</hi>, sweetness of style, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p><hi>M&amacr;y&amacr;kura&nmacr;gik&amacr;</hi>, a specimen of the <hi>&Imacr;h&amacr;m&rdotb;ga</hi>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>, n. <ref target=n346.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>M&amacr;rasa&mdota;yutta</hi>, alleged dramatic character of, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>, n. <ref target=n43.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>M&amacr;r&sdotb;a</hi>, as mode of address, <ref target=pb361 type=pageref>361</ref>.

<p><hi>M&amacr;lat&imacr;m&amacr;dhava</hi>, by Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>, <ref target=pb82 type=pageref>82</ref>, <ref target=pb131 type=pageref>131</ref>, <ref target=pb151 type=pageref>151</ref>, <ref target=pb186 type=pageref>186</ref>, <ref target=pb187 type=pageref>187</ref>, <ref target=pb188 type=pageref>188</ref>, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>, <ref target=pb199 type=pageref>199</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>, <ref target=pb280 type=pageref>280</ref>, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>, <ref target=pb308 type=pageref>308</ref>, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>, <ref target=pb343 type=pageref>343</ref>, n. <ref target=n343.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>, <ref target=pb349 type=pageref>349</ref>, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>, <ref target=pb361 type=pageref>361</ref>, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>.

<p><hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;</hi>, a specimen of the <hi>V&imacr;th&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb349 type=pageref>349</ref>.

<p><hi>M&amacr;lavik&amacr;gnimitra</hi>, by K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>, <ref target=pb124 type=pageref>124</ref>, <ref target=pb127 type=pageref>127</ref>, <ref target=pb147 type=pageref>147</ref>&ndash;9, <ref target=pb155 type=pageref>155</ref>, <ref target=pb156 type=pageref>156</ref>, <ref target=pb159 type=pageref>159</ref>, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>, <ref target=pb164 type=pageref>164</ref>, <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>, <ref target=pb175 type=pageref>175</ref>, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>, <ref target=pb343 type=pageref>343</ref>, n. <ref target=n343.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb349 type=pageref>349</ref>, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>.

<p><hi>M&amacr;l&amacr;</hi>, statement in succession, <ref target=pb330 type=pageref>330</ref>.

<p><hi>M&amacr;lin&imacr;</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>, <ref target=pb181 type=pageref>181</ref>, <ref target=pb185 type=pageref>185</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref>.

<p><hi>M&amacr;h&amacr;r&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;r&imacr;</hi>, a Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb70 type=pageref>70</ref>, <ref target=pb73 type=pageref>73</ref>, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>, <ref target=pb130 type=pageref>130</ref>, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>, <ref target=pb181 type=pageref>181</ref>, <ref target=pb211 type=pageref>211</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>, <ref target=pb236 type=pageref>236</ref>, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>.

<p><hi>Mithy&amacr;jñ&amacr;navi&ddotb;ambana</hi>, by Ravid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>.

<p><hi>Mithy&amacr;d&rdotb;&sdotb;&tdotb;i</hi>, heresy, as a character, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p><hi>Milindapañha</hi>, <ref target=pb54 type=pageref>54</ref>.

<p><hi>Miçra</hi>, combined (plot), <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>.

<p><hi>Miçr&amacr;</hi>, style, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>, n. <ref target=n332.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>Muku&tdotb;at&amacr;&ddotb;itaka</hi>, by B&amacr;&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>, n. <ref target=n182.3 type=noteref>3</ref>.

<p><hi>Mukund&amacr;nanda</hi>, by K&amacr;ç&imacr;pati Kavir&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>.

<p><hi>Mukha</hi>, first juncture of the plot, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>.

<p><hi>Mugdh&amacr;</hi>, inexperienced (heroine), <ref target=pb308 type=pageref>308</ref>.

<p><hi>Mudr&amacr;r&amacr;k&sdotb;asa</hi>, (the drama of) R&amacr;k&sdotb;asa and his seal-ring, by Viç&amacr;khadatta, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>, <ref target=pb205 type=pageref>205</ref>&ndash;12, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>, n. <ref target=n335.3 type=noteref>3</ref>, <ref target=pb341 type=pageref>341</ref>, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>, <ref target=pb352 type=pageref>352</ref>.

<p><hi>Mudritakumudacandra</hi>, (the drama of) Kumudacandra put to silence, by Yaçaçcandra, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>.

<p><hi>M&rdotb;g&amacr;&nmacr;kalekh&amacr;</hi>, by Viçvan&amacr;tha, son of Trimaladeva, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>, n. <ref target=n257.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>M&rdotb;cchaka&tdotb;ik&amacr;</hi> (for an implausible conjecture as to date (7th or 8th cent.) and author, see J. Carpentier, JRAS., 1923, pp. 597 ff.), <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>, <ref target=pb63 type=pageref>63</ref>, <ref target=pb64 type=pageref>64</ref>, <ref target=pb65 type=pageref>65</ref>, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>, <ref target=pb67 type=pageref>67</ref>, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>, <ref target=pb70 type=pageref>70</ref>, <ref target=pb74 type=pageref>74</ref>, <ref target=pb77 type=pageref>77</ref>, <ref target=pb82 type=pageref>82</ref>, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>, <ref target=pb92 type=pageref>92</ref>, <ref target=pb93 type=pageref>93</ref>, <ref target=pb104 type=pageref>104</ref>, <ref target=pb107 type=pageref>107</ref>, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>, n. <ref target=n123.3 type=noteref>3</ref>, <ref target=pb128 type=pageref>128</ref>&ndash;42, <ref target=pb153 type=pageref>153</ref>, <ref target=pb161 type=pageref>161</ref>, <ref target=pb192 type=pageref>192</ref>, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>, <ref target=pb280 type=pageref>280</ref>, <ref target=pb286 type=pageref>286</ref>, <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>, <ref target=pb309 type=pageref>309</ref>, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>, n. <ref target=n314.2 type=noteref>2</ref>, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>, n. <ref target=n335.3 type=noteref>3</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>, <ref target=pb365 type=pageref>365</ref>, <ref target=pb369 type=pageref>369</ref>, n. <ref target=n369.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>M&rdotb;dava</hi>, turning of evil into good, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>.

<p><hi>Meghad&umacr;ta</hi>, by K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>, <ref target=pb145 type=pageref>145</ref>, <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>;
  <lb>imitated by Bhavabh&umacr;ti, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>.

<p><hi>Mo&tdotb;&tdotb;&amacr;yita</hi>, manifestations of affection, <ref target=pb310 type=pageref>310</ref>.

<p><hi>Moha</hi>, confusion, as a character, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p><hi>Mohamudgara</hi>, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref>.

<p><hi>Mohar&amacr;japar&amacr;jaya</hi>, by Yaça&hdotb;p&amacr;la, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>, n. <ref target=n84.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>&ndash;6, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>, n. <ref target=n344.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.y>
<head>Y</head>

<p><hi>Y</hi> retained in Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s Pr&amacr;krits, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>;
  <lb>altered to <hi>j</hi> in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p><hi>Yajurveda</hi>, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb25 type=pageref>25</ref>, <ref target=pb26 type=pageref>26</ref>.

<p><hi>Yamaka</hi>, alliteration, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p><hi>Yavanik&amacr;</hi> (Pr&amacr;krit, <hi>Javanik&amacr;</hi>), refers to material of curtain, <ref target=pb61 type=pageref>61</ref>, <ref target=pb68 type=pageref>68</ref>, <ref target=pb359 type=pageref>359</ref>, <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>.

<p><hi>Yudh</hi>, as a masculine noun, in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p><hi>Yuvar&amacr;ja</hi>, style of, in drama, <ref target=pb71 type=pageref>71</ref>.

<p><hi>Yeva</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s Pr&amacr;krit, after long vowels, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>.

<p><hi>Yogam&amacr;y&amacr;</hi>, as a character, <ref target=pb274 type=pageref>274</ref>.

<p><hi>Yogaç&amacr;stra</hi>, by Hemacandra, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.

<p><hi>Yogin</hi>, adept, <ref target=pb316 type=pageref>316</ref>.

<p><hi>Yodha</hi>, soldier, speech of, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.r>
<head>R</head>

<p><hi>R</hi> and <hi>l</hi> in the Pr&amacr;krits, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>;
  <lb>as affecting the quality of style, <ref target=pb332 type=pageref>332</ref>.

<p><hi>Raghuva&ndota;ça</hi>, by K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb75 type=pageref>75</ref>, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>, <ref target=pb162 type=pageref>162</ref>, <ref target=pb352 type=pageref>352</ref>.

<p><hi>Ra&nmacr;gadv&amacr;ra</hi>, part of preliminaries, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>.

<p><hi>Ra&nmacr;g&amacr;vatara&ndotb;a</hi>, appearing on the stage, <ref target=pb55 type=pageref>55</ref>.

<p><hi>Rajas</hi>, element of passion, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>.

<p><hi>Rati</hi>, love, as basis of sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p><hi>Ratn&amacr;val&imacr;</hi>, by Har&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb55 type=pageref>55</ref>, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>, <ref target=pb103 type=pageref>103</ref>, <ref target=pb170 type=pageref>170</ref>, <ref target=pb171 type=pageref>171</ref>, <ref target=pb173 type=pageref>173</ref>, <ref target=pb175 type=pageref>175</ref>, <ref target=pb180 type=pageref>180</ref>, <ref target=pb221 type=pageref>221</ref>, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>, <ref target=pb304 type=pageref>304</ref>, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>, <ref target=pb361 type=pageref>361</ref>, <ref target=pb362 type=pageref>362</ref>, <ref target=pb368 type=pageref>368</ref>.

<p><hi>Rathoddhat&amacr;</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>.

<p><hi>Rasa</hi>, sentiment, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>&ndash;26.

<p><hi>Rasatara&nmacr;gi&ndotb;&imacr;</hi>, by Bh&amacr;nudatta, <ref target=pb319 type=pageref>319</ref>.

<p><hi>Ras&amacr;r&ndotb;avasudh&amacr;kara</hi>, by Çi&nmacr;ga Bh&umacr;p&amacr;la, <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>.

<p><hi>Rasika</hi>, men of taste, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>, n. <ref target=n318.3 type=noteref>3</ref>.

<p><hi>R&amacr;japutras</hi>, speech of, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p><hi>R&amacr;japraçniya</hi>, <ref target=pb44 type=pageref>44</ref>, n. <ref target=n44.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>R&amacr;jar&amacr;jan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>, n. <ref target=n251.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>R&amacr;jaçr&imacr;</hi>, the kingly fortune, personified<corr>,</corr> <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>, <ref target=pb112 type=pageref>112</ref>.

<pb n=402 id=pb402 facs="f:402"><p><hi>R&amacr;jyaçr&imacr;</hi>, the royal fortune, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.

<p><hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;nanda</hi>, <ref target=pb343 type=pageref>343</ref>, n. <ref target=n343.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;bhyudaya</hi>, by Vy&amacr;sa Çr&imacr;r&amacr;madeva, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.

<p><hi>R&amacr;m&amacr;ya&ndotb;a</hi>, by V&amacr;lm&imacr;ki, <ref target=pb28 type=pageref>28</ref>, <ref target=pb29 type=pageref>29</ref>, <ref target=pb30 type=pageref>30</ref>, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>, <ref target=pb50 type=pageref>50</ref>, <ref target=pb63 type=pageref>63</ref>, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>, <ref target=pb101 type=pageref>101</ref>, <ref target=pb105 type=pageref>105</ref>, <ref target=pb114 type=pageref>114</ref>, <ref target=pb150 type=pageref>150</ref>, n. <ref target=n150.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>R&amacr;&sdotb;&tdotb;riya</hi>, as title in dramas, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>, <ref target=pb71 type=pageref>71</ref>.

<p><hi>R&amacr;sa</hi>, a dance, <ref target=pb274 type=pageref>274</ref>.

<p><hi>R&amacr;sama&ndotb;&ddotb;ala</hi>, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>.

<p><hi>Rukmi&ndotb;&imacr;pari&ndotb;aya</hi>, by R&amacr;mavarman, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>.

<p><hi>Rukmi&ndotb;&imacr;hara&ndotb;a</hi>, by Vatsar&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>.

<p><hi>Rasasadana</hi>, a <hi>Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>.

<p><hi>Rucir&amacr;</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>, <ref target=pb185 type=pageref>185</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>.

<p><hi>Rudant&imacr;</hi>, irregular form in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p><hi>R&umacr;pa</hi>, in Açoka&apos;s edict, <ref target=pb54 type=pageref>54</ref>;
  <lb>object of vision, source of <hi>R&umacr;paka</hi>, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>.

<p><hi>R&umacr;paka</hi>, generic name of the drama as a spectacle, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>, <ref target=pb345 type=pageref>345</ref>.

<p><hi>R&umacr;padakkha</hi>, meaning of, <ref target=pb54 type=pageref>54</ref>.

<p><hi>R&umacr;p&amacr;j&imacr;va</hi>, epithet of actors, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>.

<p><hi>R&umacr;popaj&imacr;vana</hi>, sense of, <ref target=pb54 type=pageref>54</ref>.

<p><hi>R&umacr;popaj&imacr;vin</hi>, one who lives on the beauty (of his wife), <ref target=pb55 type=pageref>55</ref>.

<p><hi>Raudra</hi>, fury as a sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>, <ref target=pb354 type=pageref>354</ref>.

<p><hi>Raudrat&amacr;</hi>, harshness, as a character, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.

<p><hi>Ry</hi> becomes <hi>yy</hi> in Açvagho&sdotb;a and Bh&amacr;sa, <hi>jj</hi> in K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>;
  <lb>but <hi>jj</hi> in Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s <hi>M&amacr;gadh&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>;
  <lb>in Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.l>
<head>L</head>

<p><hi>L</hi> and <hi>r</hi> in the Pr&amacr;krits, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>.

<p><hi>Lak&sdotb;a&ndotb;a</hi>, beauties of the drama, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>, <ref target=pb330 type=pageref>330</ref>.

<p><hi>Lajj&amacr;</hi>, allegorical character, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>.

<p><hi>La&tdotb;akamelaka</hi>, by Ça&nmacr;khadhara, <ref target=pb5 type=pageref>5</ref>;
  <lb>Kavir&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb260 type=pageref>260</ref>, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>.

<p><hi>Lalita</hi>, light-hearted (hero), <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>.

<p><hi>Lalitam&amacr;dhava</hi>, by R&umacr;pa Gosv&amacr;min, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>.

<p><hi>Lalitavigrahar&amacr;jan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, by Somadeva, <ref target=pb243 type=pageref>243</ref>, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>.

<p><hi>Lalitavistara</hi>, allusion to the drama in, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>.

<p><hi>L&amacr;sya</hi>, dance, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb42 type=pageref>42</ref>, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>.

<p><hi>L&imacr;l&amacr;madhukara</hi>, a <hi>Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>.

<p><hi>L&umacr;padakkha</hi>, meaning of, <ref target=pb54 type=pageref>54</ref>.

<p><hi>Laukika</hi>, sentiment as natural, <ref target=pb319 type=pageref>319</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.v>
<head>V</head>

<p><hi>Vaa&mdota;</hi>, <hi>vaya&mdota;</hi>, &lsquo;we&rsquo;, in Açvagho&sdotb;a&apos;s and Bh&amacr;sa&apos;s Pr&amacr;krits, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p><hi>Va&ndota;çasth&amacr;</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>, <ref target=pb185 type=pageref>185</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>.

<p><hi>Va&ndota;k&sdotb;&umacr;</hi>, Oxus, <ref target=pb144 type=pageref>144</ref>, n. <ref target=n144.5 type=noteref>5</ref>.

<p><hi>Vajras&umacr;c&imacr;</hi>, by Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb80 type=pageref>80</ref>.

<p><hi>Vat</hi>, nominative of stems in, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>.

<p><hi>Vatsa</hi>, as style of address, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>Vann&imacr;k&amacr;hi</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>.

<p><hi>Vayasya</hi>, as style of address, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>Vara</hi>, frequent use of, in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb120 type=pageref>120</ref>.

<p><hi>Var&ndotb;&amacr;nyatva</hi>, change of colour or difference of colour, <ref target=pb35 type=pageref>35</ref>.

<p><hi>Var&sdotb;adhara</hi>, eunuch, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>.

<p><hi>Vasantatilaka</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>, <ref target=pb181 type=pageref>181</ref>, <ref target=pb185 type=pageref>185</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>, <ref target=pb236 type=pageref>236</ref>, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref>.

<p><hi>Vasantatilaka</hi>, by Varad&amacr;c&amacr;rya, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p><hi>Vastu</hi>, plot, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>&ndash;305.

<p><hi>Vast&umacr;tth&amacr;pana</hi>, creation of an object, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p><hi>V&amacr;cika</hi> (sentiment), produced by words, <ref target=pb315 type=pageref>315</ref>, n. <ref target=n315.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>V&amacr;cik&amacr;bhinaya</hi>, expression by words, <ref target=pb367 type=pageref>367</ref>.

<p><hi>V&amacr;sakasajj&amacr;</hi> (heroine), in full dress, <ref target=pb309 type=pageref>309</ref>.

<p><hi>V&amacr;santikasvapna</hi>, by R. K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;amachari, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>.

<p><hi>V&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi>, by Subandhu, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>.

<p><hi>Vik&amacr;sa</hi>, expansion of the mind, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>.

<p><hi>Vikramorvaç&imacr;</hi>, by K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>, <ref target=pb124 type=pageref>124</ref>, <ref target=pb126 type=pageref>126</ref>, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>, <ref target=pb147 type=pageref>147</ref>, <ref target=pb149 type=pageref>149</ref>&ndash;52, <ref target=pb156 type=pageref>156</ref>, <ref target=pb157 type=pageref>157</ref>, <ref target=pb159 type=pageref>159</ref>, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>, <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>, <ref target=pb275 type=pageref>275</ref>, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>, n. <ref target=n339.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>, <ref target=pb343 type=pageref>343</ref>, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>.

<p><hi>Vikr&amacr;ntaç&umacr;draka</hi>, a drama, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>, n. <ref target=n129.4 type=noteref>4</ref>.

<p><hi>Vik&sdotb;epa</hi>, movement to and fro of the mind as connected with sentiment, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>.

<p><hi>Vijayaçr&imacr;</hi>, by Madana B&amacr;lasarasvat&imacr;, <ref target=pb256 type=pageref>256</ref>.

<p><hi>Vi&tdotb;a</hi>, parasite, <ref target=pb65 type=pageref>65</ref>, <ref target=pb132 type=pageref>132</ref>, <ref target=pb135 type=pageref>135</ref>, <ref target=pb136 type=pageref>136</ref>, <ref target=pb177 type=pageref>177</ref>, <ref target=pb193 type=pageref>193</ref>, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>, <ref target=pb356 type=pageref>356</ref>.

<p><hi>Vidagdham&amacr;dhava</hi>, by R&umacr;pa Gosv&amacr;min, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>.

<p><hi>Vid&umacr;&sdotb;aka</hi>, jester, <ref target=pb28 type=pageref>28</ref>, <ref target=pb39 type=pageref>39</ref>, <ref target=pb40 type=pageref>40</ref>, <ref target=pb50 type=pageref>50</ref>, <ref target=pb51 type=pageref>51</ref>, <ref target=pb52 type=pageref>52</ref>, <ref target=pb53 type=pageref>53</ref>, <ref target=pb56 type=pageref>56</ref>, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>, <ref target=pb65 type=pageref>65</ref>, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>, <ref target=pb67 type=pageref>67</ref>, <ref target=pb73 type=pageref>73</ref>, <ref target=pb81 type=pageref>81</ref>, <ref target=pb82 type=pageref>82</ref>, <ref target=pb84 type=pageref>84</ref>, <ref target=pb107 type=pageref>107</ref>, <ref target=pb108 type=pageref>108</ref>, <ref target=pb133 type=pageref>133</ref>, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb156 type=pageref>156</ref>, <ref target=pb158 type=pageref>158</ref>, <ref target=pb159 type=pageref>159</ref>, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>, <ref target=pb176 type=pageref>176</ref>, <ref target=pb177 type=pageref>177</ref>, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>, <ref target=pb237 type=pageref>237</ref>, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>, <ref target=pb310 type=pageref>310</ref>, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>, <ref target=pb361 type=pageref>361</ref>.

<p><hi>Vidy&amacr;</hi>, as a character, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p><hi>Vidy&amacr;pari&ndotb;ayana</hi>, by Vedakavi, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>.

<p><hi>Vidyunm&amacr;l&amacr;</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>.

<p><hi>Viddhaç&amacr;labhañjik&amacr;</hi>, by R&amacr;jaçekhara, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>, <ref target=pb235 type=pageref>235</ref>, <ref target=pb300 type=pageref>300</ref>.

<p><hi>Viprayoga</hi>, sundering, as form of the erotic sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p><hi>Vipralabdh&amacr;</hi>, deceived (heroine), <ref target=pb309 type=pageref>309</ref>.

<p><hi>Vipralambha</hi>, sundering, as form of erotic sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p><hi>Vibh&amacr;va</hi>, determinants of sentiment, <ref target=pb315 type=pageref>315</ref>.

<p><hi>Vibh&amacr;&sdotb;&amacr;s</hi>, conventional dialects used in drama, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>.

<p><hi>Vimadda</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a for <hi>vimarda</hi>, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>.

<p><hi>Vimarça</hi>, fourth juncture of the plot, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>.

<p><hi>Vimoktuk&amacr;ma</hi>, irregular form in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p><hi>Viya</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>.

<p><hi>Virahotka&ndotb;&tdotb;hit&amacr;</hi>, type of heroine, <ref target=pb309 type=pageref>309</ref>.

<p><hi>Vil&amacr;sa</hi>, vivacity as quality of the hero, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>.

<p><hi>Vil&amacr;sik&amacr;</hi>, a form of drama, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p><hi>Viveka</hi>, discrimination, <ref target=pb251 type=pageref>251</ref>, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p><hi>Vivekacandra</hi>, as allegorical character, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>.

<p><hi>Vi&sdotb;kambha</hi> or <hi>Vi&sdotb;kambhaka</hi>, introductory scene, <ref target=pb110 type=pageref>110</ref>, <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>.

<pb n=403 id=pb403 facs="f:403"><p><hi>Vi&sdotb;&ndotb;u Pur&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>.

<p><hi>Vis&umacr;kadassana</hi>, spectacle, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>.

<p><hi>Vistara</hi>, expansion of the mind, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>.

<p><hi>Vismaya</hi>, astonishment, as basis of sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p><hi>V&imacr;janti</hi>, irregular form in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb120 type=pageref>120</ref>.

<p><hi>V&imacr;tar&amacr;gastuti</hi>, by Hemacandra, <ref target=pb255 type=pageref>255</ref>.

<p><hi>V&imacr;th&imacr;</hi>, &lsquo;garland&rsquo;, <ref target=pb295 type=pageref>295</ref>, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>, <ref target=pb349 type=pageref>349</ref>, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>.

<p><hi>V&imacr;ra</hi>, heroism as a sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p><hi>V&imacr;rabhadravij&rdotb;mbha&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>, n. <ref target=n328.3 type=noteref>3</ref>.

<p><hi>V&imacr;ravijaya</hi>, by K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;amiçra, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>.

<p><hi>V&rdotb;ttis</hi>, dramatic styles, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>&ndash;9.

<p><hi>V&rdotb;ddhi</hi>, sense of, <ref target=pb36 type=pageref>36</ref>, n. <ref target=n36.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>V&rdotb;&sdotb;abh&amacr;nuj&amacr;</hi>, by Mathur&amacr;d&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>.

<p><hi>Ve&ndotb;&imacr;sa&mdota;h&amacr;ra</hi>, by Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a N&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb83 type=pageref>83</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>&ndash;9, <ref target=pb300 type=pageref>300</ref>, <ref target=pb304 type=pageref>304</ref>, <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>, n. <ref target=n344.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>, <ref target=pb361 type=pageref>361</ref>.

<p><hi>Vet&amacr;lapañcavi&ndota;çati</hi>, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>, <ref target=pb174 type=pageref>174</ref>.

<p><hi>Ved&amacr;ntas&amacr;ra</hi>, by Sad&amacr;nanda, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>, n. <ref target=n318.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>Ve&sdotb;&tdotb;ita</hi>, stage costumes, <ref target=pb365 type=pageref>365</ref>.

<p><hi>Vait&amacr;l&imacr;ya</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>, <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>.

<p><hi>Vaiçika</hi>, connoisseur of hetaerae, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>, n. <ref target=n307.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>Vaiçvadev&imacr;</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>.

<p><hi>Vyaktiviveka</hi>, by Mahiman Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a, <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>.

<p><hi>Vyañjan&amacr;</hi>, the doctrine of suggestion, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>.

<p><hi>Vyabhic&amacr;rin</hi>, transitory (feelings), <ref target=pb315 type=pageref>315</ref>.

<p><hi>Vy&amacr;jima</hi>, kind of stage properties, <ref target=pb365 type=pageref>365</ref>.

<p><hi>Vy&amacr;miçraka</hi>, possible reference to plays, <ref target=pb29 type=pageref>29</ref>.

<p><hi>Vy&amacr;yoga</hi>, a type of drama, <ref target=pb95 type=pageref>95</ref>, <ref target=pb96 type=pageref>96</ref>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>&ndash;6, <ref target=pb296 type=pageref>296</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>, <ref target=pb347 type=pageref>347</ref>, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>.

<p><hi>Vyutpatti</hi>, aesthetic equipment, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>.

<p><hi>Vy&umacr;&ddotb;horas</hi>, irregular compound in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.sh>
<head>Ç</head>

<p><hi>Ç</hi>, for <hi>s</hi> in <hi>M&amacr;gadh&imacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>.

<p><hi>Ça&ndota;s</hi>, recite, used of <hi>&Rdotb;gveda</hi>, <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref>.

<p><hi>Çak&amacr;ra, <foreign lang=la>miles gloriosus</foreign></hi>, <ref target=pb65 type=pageref>65</ref>, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>, <ref target=pb134 type=pageref>134</ref>, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p><hi>Çakuntal&amacr;</hi>, by K&amacr;lid&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>, <ref target=pb70 type=pageref>70</ref>, <ref target=pb124 type=pageref>124</ref>, <ref target=pb139 type=pageref>139</ref>, <ref target=pb147 type=pageref>147</ref>, <ref target=pb152 type=pageref>152</ref>&ndash;5, <ref target=pb157 type=pageref>157</ref>&ndash;9, <ref target=pb160 type=pageref>160</ref>, <ref target=pb161 type=pageref>161</ref>, <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref>, <ref target=pb278 type=pageref>278</ref>, <ref target=pb281 type=pageref>281</ref>, <ref target=pb297 type=pageref>297</ref>, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>, <ref target=pb299 type=pageref>299</ref>, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>, <ref target=pb304 type=pageref>304</ref>, <ref target=pb311 type=pageref>311</ref>, <ref target=pb325 type=pageref>325</ref>, <ref target=pb329 type=pageref>329</ref>, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>, <ref target=pb365 type=pageref>365</ref>.

<p><hi>Çakvar&imacr;</hi>, metre, appropriate to the pathetic sentiment, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p><hi>Ça&tdotb;ha</hi>, deceitful (hero), <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>.

<p><hi>Çatapatha Br&amacr;hma&ndotb;a</hi>, tale of Pur&umacr;ravas in, <ref target=pb22 type=pageref>22</ref>.

<p><hi>Çarmi&sdotb;&tdotb;h&amacr;yay&amacr;ti</hi>, by K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a Kavi, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>.

<p><hi>Ç&amacr;k&amacr;r&imacr;</hi>, a Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>.

<p><hi>Ç&amacr;nta</hi>, calm (hero), <ref target=pb305 type=pageref>305</ref>, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>;
  <lb>sentiment, <ref target=pb324 type=pageref>324</ref>.

<p><hi>Ç&amacr;nti Parvan</hi>, allusion to drama in, <ref target=pb28 type=pageref>28</ref>.

<p><hi>Ç&amacr;bar&imacr;</hi>, a Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb337 type=pageref>337</ref>.

<p><hi>Ç&amacr;rad&amacr;tilaka</hi>, by Ça&nmacr;kara, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>, <ref target=pb348 type=pageref>348</ref>.

<p><hi>Ç&amacr;radvat&imacr;putraprakara&ndotb;a</hi> or <hi>Ç&amacr;riputraprakara&ndotb;a</hi>, by Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb80 type=pageref>80</ref>, <ref target=pb83 type=pageref>83</ref>, <ref target=pb85 type=pageref>85</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>.

<p><hi>Ç&amacr;rd&umacr;lavikr&imacr;&ddotb;ita</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>, <ref target=pb181 type=pageref>181</ref>, <ref target=pb185 type=pageref>185</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>, <ref target=pb236 type=pageref>236</ref>, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>, <ref target=pb258 type=pageref>258</ref>, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref>.

<p><hi>Ç&amacr;labhañjik&amacr;</hi>, statue, <ref target=pb234 type=pageref>234</ref>.

<p><hi>Ç&amacr;lin&imacr;</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>, <ref target=pb181 type=pageref>181</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>.

<p><hi>Çik&sdotb;&amacr;pada</hi>, moral rules of the Buddhists, <ref target=pb184 type=pageref>184</ref>.

<p><hi>Çikhari&ndotb;&imacr;</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>, <ref target=pb181 type=pageref>181</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>.

<p><hi>Çilpaka</hi>, a form of drama, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p><hi>Çivan&amacr;r&amacr;ya&ndotb;abhañjamahodaya</hi>, by Narasi&ndota;ha, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>.

<p><hi>Çi&sdotb;yalekh&amacr;</hi>, by Candra, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>.

<p><hi>Çuddha</hi>, type of <hi>Vi&sdotb;kambhaka</hi>, <ref target=pb301 type=pageref>301</ref>.

<p><hi>Ç&umacr;drakavadha</hi>, a <hi>Parikath&amacr;</hi>, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>, n. <ref target=n129.4 type=noteref>4</ref>.

<p><hi>Ç&rdotb;&nmacr;g&amacr;ra</hi>, love as a sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p><hi>Ç&rdotb;&nmacr;g&amacr;ratilaka</hi>, by R&amacr;mabhadra D&imacr;k&sdotb;ita, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p><hi>Ç&rdotb;&nmacr;g&amacr;rabh&umacr;&sdotb;a&ndotb;a</hi>, by V&amacr;mana Bha&tdotb;&tdotb;a B&amacr;&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>.

<p><hi>Ç&rdotb;&nmacr;g&amacr;ramañjar&imacr;</hi><corr>,</corr> a <hi>Bh&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>, n. <ref target=n263.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>Ç&rdotb;&nmacr;g&amacr;ramañjar&imacr;</hi>, a <hi>Sa&tdotb;&tdotb;aka</hi>, by Viçveçvara, <ref target=pb257 type=pageref>257</ref>.

<p><hi>Ç&rdotb;&nmacr;g&amacr;ramañjar&imacr;</hi>, cited in the <hi>Ras&amacr;r&ndotb;avasudh&amacr;kara</hi>, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>, n. <ref target=n338.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>Ç&rdotb;&nmacr;g&amacr;rasarvasva</hi>, by Nall&amacr; Kavi, <ref target=pb263 type=pageref>263</ref>, <ref target=pb264 type=pageref>264</ref>.

<p><hi>Ç&rdotb;&ndotb;vam</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a for <hi>ç&rdotb;&ndotb;van</hi> (<hi>ç&rdotb;&ndotb;va&mdota;</hi>), <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>.

<p><hi>Çail&amacr;li Br&amacr;hma&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb31 type=pageref>31</ref>.

<p><hi>Çail&umacr;&sdotb;a</hi>, actor, <ref target=pb25 type=pageref>25</ref>, <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>.

<p><hi>Çoka</hi>, sorrow, as basis of sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p><hi>Çobhanikas</hi>, actors, <ref target=pb32 type=pageref>32</ref>&ndash;5.

<p><hi>Çobh&amacr;</hi>, brilliance as quality of the hero, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>.

<p><hi>Çobh&amacr;</hi>, distinction of poem, <ref target=pb334 type=pageref>334</ref>.

<p><hi>Çaubhikas</hi>, kind of actors, <ref target=pb32 type=pageref>32</ref>&ndash;5, <ref target=pb45 type=pageref>45</ref>, <ref target=pb53 type=pageref>53</ref>, <ref target=pb55 type=pageref>55</ref>, <ref target=pb273 type=pageref>273</ref>, <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>.

<p><hi>Çaurasen&imacr;</hi>, a Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb41 type=pageref>41</ref>, <ref target=pb70 type=pageref>70</ref>, <ref target=pb73 type=pageref>73</ref>, <ref target=pb74 type=pageref>74</ref>, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>, <ref target=pb181 type=pageref>181</ref>, <ref target=pb185 type=pageref>185</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>, <ref target=pb211 type=pageref>211</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>, <ref target=pb236 type=pageref>236</ref>, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>, <ref target=pb335 type=pageref>335</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>, <ref target=pb367 type=pageref>367</ref>.

<p><hi>Çy&amacr;ma</hi>, dark colour of the erotic sentiment, <ref target=pb324 type=pageref>324</ref>.

<p><hi>Çraddh&amacr;</hi>, faith, as a character, <ref target=pb252 type=pageref>252</ref>.

<p><hi>Çr&imacr;ka&ndotb;&tdotb;hacarita</hi>, by Ma&nmacr;kha, <ref target=pb75 type=pageref>75</ref>, n. <ref target=n75.3 type=noteref>3</ref>, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>.

<p><hi>Çr&imacr;gadita</hi>, a type of drama, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p><hi>Çr&imacr;d&amacr;macarita</hi>, by S&amacr;mar&amacr;ja D&imacr;k&sdotb;ita, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>.

<p><hi>Çre&sdotb;&tdotb;hin</hi>, guildsmen, or rich merchants, speech of, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb141 type=pageref>141</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>.

<p><hi>Çle&sdotb;a</hi>, flow of style, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p><hi>Çloka</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>, <ref target=pb181 type=pageref>181</ref>, <ref target=pb185 type=pageref>185</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>, <ref target=pb236 type=pageref>236</ref>, <ref target=pb240 type=pageref>240</ref>, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.ss>
<head>&Sdotb;</head>

<p><hi>&Sdotb;&tdotb;</hi> and <hi>&sdotb;&tdotb;h</hi>, treatment of, in Pr&amacr;krit, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>.


<div2 id=ix.sa.s>
<head>S</head>

<p><hi>S</hi>, alone preserved in certain Pr&amacr;krits, <ref target=pb87 type=pageref>87</ref>, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>, <ref target=pb122 type=pageref>122</ref>.

<p><hi>Sa&mdota;l&amacr;pa</hi>, dialogue, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p><hi>Sa&mdota;l&amacr;paka</hi>, a form of drama, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p><hi>Sa&mdota;kalpas&umacr;ryodaya</hi>, by Ve&nmacr;ka&tdotb;an&amacr;tha, <ref target=pb253 type=pageref>253</ref>.

<pb n=404 id=pb404 facs="f:404"><p><hi>Sa&mdota;k&imacr;r&ndotb;a</hi>, mixed form of <hi>Vi&sdotb;kambhaka</hi>, <ref target=pb302 type=pageref>302</ref>.

<p><hi>Sa&mdota;k&rdotb;ti</hi>, metre, appropriate to lively dialogue, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p><hi>Sa&mdota;k&sdotb;ipti</hi>, construction of object, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p><hi>Sa&mdota;gamama&ndotb;i</hi>, stone of reunion, <ref target=pb62 type=pageref>62</ref>.

<p><hi>Sa&mdota;g&imacr;tad&amacr;modara</hi>, unites ornaments and beauties, <ref target=pb330 type=pageref>330</ref>, n. <ref target=n330.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>Sa&mdota;gh&amacr;tya</hi>, breach of alliance, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p><hi>Saciva</hi>, as style of a minister, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>Sa&tdotb;&tdotb;aka</hi>, a type of drama, <ref target=pb233 type=pageref>233</ref>, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>.

<p><hi>Sattva</hi>, element of goodness or truth, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>.

<p><hi>Saddharmapu&ndotb;&ddotb;ar&imacr;ka</hi>, dramatic form of the, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>.

<p><hi>Sandhi</hi>, junctures of the plot, <ref target=pb298 type=pageref>298</ref>&ndash;300.

<p><hi>Sandhima</hi>, kind of stage properties, <ref target=pb365 type=pageref>365</ref>.

<p><hi>Sandhyantara</hi>, divisions of junctures, <ref target=pb303 type=pageref>303</ref>.

<p><hi>Sabh&amacr;pati</hi>, patron of the drama, <ref target=pb370 type=pageref>370</ref>.

<p><hi>Samajja</hi> or <hi>Sam&amacr;ja</hi>, form of entertainment, <ref target=pb43 type=pageref>43</ref>, <ref target=pb85 type=pageref>85</ref>.

<p><hi>Samat&amacr;</hi>, homogeneity of style, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p><hi>Samavak&amacr;ra</hi>, a type of drama, <ref target=pb97 type=pageref>97</ref>, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>, <ref target=pb291 type=pageref>291</ref>, <ref target=pb346 type=pageref>346</ref>, <ref target=pb353 type=pageref>353</ref>.

<p><hi>Sam&amacr;ja</hi>, <ref target=pb85 type=pageref>85</ref>, and see <hi>Samajja</hi>.

<p><hi>Sam&amacr;dhi</hi>, metaphorical language, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p><hi>Sam&amacr;çv&amacr;situm</hi>, irregular form in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p><hi>Samudramathana</hi>, by Vatsar&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>.

<p><hi>Samudramanthana</hi>, a <hi>Samavak&amacr;ra</hi>, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>.

<p><hi>Samphe&tdotb;a</hi>, fighting, <ref target=pb328 type=pageref>328</ref>.

<p><hi>Sambhoga</hi>, union, as part of erotic sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p><hi>Sarvacarita</hi>, by B&amacr;&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>, n. <ref target=n182.3 type=noteref>3</ref>.

<p><hi>Sarvar&amacr;jña&hdotb;</hi>, irregular compound in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb121 type=pageref>121</ref>.

<p><hi>Sarvavinodan&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, by K&rdotb;&sdotb;&ndotb;a Avadh&umacr;ta Gha&tdotb;ik&amacr;çata Mah&amacr;kavi, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>.

<p><hi>Sassir&imacr;ka&mdota;</hi>, for <hi>saçr&imacr;kam</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb88 type=pageref>88</ref>.

<p><hi>Sah&rdotb;daya</hi>, man of taste, <ref target=pb318 type=pageref>318</ref>.

<p><hi>S&amacr;ttvat&imacr;</hi>, correctly <hi>S&amacr;tvat&imacr;</hi>, grand (manner), <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p><hi>S&amacr;ttvika</hi>, of excellencies of hero, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>.

<p><hi>S&amacr;ttvika</hi>, class of consequents, <ref target=pb315 type=pageref>315</ref>.

<p><hi>S&amacr;ttvik&amacr;bhinaya</hi>, nature of, <ref target=pb367 type=pageref>367</ref>, <ref target=pb368 type=pageref>368</ref>.

<p><hi>S&amacr;&ddotb;ika</hi>, dance, <ref target=pb350 type=pageref>350</ref>, n. <ref target=n350.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>S&amacr;tvat&imacr;</hi> (&lsquo;of the Satvants&rsquo;, cf. Lévi, TI. i. 332), grand (manner), <ref target=pb326 type=pageref>326</ref>, <ref target=pb327 type=pageref>327</ref>.

<p><hi>S&amacr;dh&amacr;ra&ndotb;&imacr;</hi>, courtesan, <ref target=pb309 type=pageref>309</ref>.

<p><hi>S&amacr;dh&amacr;ra&ndotb;&imacr; k&rdotb;ti</hi>, generic power of poetry, <ref target=pb321 type=pageref>321</ref>.

<p><hi>S&amacr;dhu</hi>, style of address, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>S&amacr;maveda</hi>, <ref target=pb12 type=pageref>12</ref>, <ref target=pb15 type=pageref>15</ref>, <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref>, <ref target=pb26 type=pageref>26</ref>.

<p><hi>S&amacr;vitr&imacr;carita</hi>, by Ça&nmacr;karal&amacr;la, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.

<p><hi>S&amacr;hityadarpa&ndotb;a</hi>, by Viçvan&amacr;tha, <ref target=pb71 type=pageref>71</ref>, <ref target=pb225 type=pageref>225</ref>, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>, <ref target=pb294 type=pageref>294</ref>, <ref target=pb295 type=pageref>295</ref>, <ref target=pb336 type=pageref>336</ref>, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>.

<p><hi>Siddh&amacr;ntakaumud&imacr;</hi>, cites R&amacr;jaçekhara for grammar, <ref target=pb230 type=pageref>230</ref>.

<p><hi>Sukum&amacr;rat&amacr;</hi>, softness of style, <ref target=pb331 type=pageref>331</ref>.

<p><hi>Suk&rdotb;tasa&mdota;k&imacr;rtana</hi>, by Arisi&ndota;ha, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>, n. <ref target=n248.7 type=noteref>7</ref>.

<p><hi>Sug&rdotb;h&imacr;tan&amacr;man</hi>, as title in dramas, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>, <ref target=pb71 type=pageref>71</ref>.

<p><hi>Sug&rdotb;h&imacr;t&amacr;bhidha</hi>, as style of address, <ref target=pb71 type=pageref>71</ref>, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>Sudhan&amacr;vad&amacr;na</hi>, <ref target=pb150 type=pageref>150</ref>, n. <ref target=n150.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb156 type=pageref>156</ref>, n. <ref target=n156.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>Supar&ndotb;&amacr;dhy&amacr;ya</hi>, character of the, <ref target=pb17 type=pageref>17</ref>, <ref target=pb21 type=pageref>21</ref>.

<p><hi>Subuddhi</hi>, a female character, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>.

<p><hi>Subhadr&amacr;dhana&mdota;jaya</hi>, by Kulaçekharavarman, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>, n. <ref target=n342.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>Subhadr&amacr;pari&ndotb;ayana</hi>, by Vy&amacr;sa Çr&imacr;r&amacr;madeva, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.

<p><hi>Subhadr&amacr;hara&ndotb;a</hi>, by M&amacr;dhava, <ref target=pb268 type=pageref>268</ref>, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p><hi>Subh&amacr;&sdotb;it&amacr;vali</hi>, <ref target=pb168 type=pageref>168</ref>, <ref target=pb209 type=pageref>209</ref>.

<p><hi>Surada</hi>, for <hi>surata</hi>, an isolated form, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb89 type=pageref>89</ref>.

<p><hi>Sur&amacr;</hi>, origin of, <ref target=pb183 type=pageref>183</ref>.

<p><hi>Suvadan&amacr;</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>.

<p><hi>S&umacr;caka</hi>, part undertaken by the, <ref target=pb273 type=pageref>273</ref>, <ref target=pb274 type=pageref>274</ref>.

<p><hi>S&umacr;tradh&amacr;ra</hi>, <ref target=pb51 type=pageref>51</ref>, <ref target=pb52 type=pageref>52</ref>, <ref target=pb56 type=pageref>56</ref>, <ref target=pb65 type=pageref>65</ref>, <ref target=pb66 type=pageref>66</ref>, <ref target=pb91 type=pageref>91</ref>, <ref target=pb92 type=pageref>92</ref>, <ref target=pb126 type=pageref>126</ref>, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>, <ref target=pb273 type=pageref>273</ref>, <ref target=pb339 type=pageref>339</ref>, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>, <ref target=pb341 type=pageref>341</ref>, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>, <ref target=pb343 type=pageref>343</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>, <ref target=pb360 type=pageref>360</ref>, <ref target=pb361 type=pageref>361</ref>, <ref target=pb362 type=pageref>362</ref>, <ref target=pb363 type=pageref>363</ref>, <ref target=pb365 type=pageref>365</ref>.

<p><hi>S&umacr;tr&amacr;la&mdota;k&amacr;ra</hi>, by Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb80 type=pageref>80</ref>, <ref target=pb81 type=pageref>81</ref>.

<p><hi>Sen&amacr;pati</hi>, general, <ref target=pb306 type=pageref>306</ref>, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>.

<p><hi>Saindhava</hi>, a kind of song, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>.

<p><hi>Sobhiya</hi>, Pr&amacr;krit for <hi>Çaubhika</hi>, <ref target=pb55 type=pageref>55</ref>.

<p><hi>Somat&amacr;</hi>, gentleness, as a character, <ref target=pb254 type=pageref>254</ref>.

<p><hi>Saugandhik&amacr;hara&ndotb;a</hi>, by Viçvan&amacr;tha, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>.

<p><hi>Saundarananda</hi>, by Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb80 type=pageref>80</ref>, <ref target=pb81 type=pageref>81</ref>.

<p><hi>Saubhya</hi>, misreading for <hi>Saumya</hi>, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref>, n. <ref target=n272.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>Saumya</hi>, as style of address, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>Skanda Pur&amacr;&ndotb;a</hi>, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>.

<p><hi>Sth&amacr;paka</hi>, <ref target=pb36 type=pageref>36</ref>, n. <ref target=n36.1 type=noteref>1</ref>, <ref target=pb52 type=pageref>52</ref>, <ref target=pb56 type=pageref>56</ref>, <ref target=pb126 type=pageref>126</ref>, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref>, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>, <ref target=pb266 type=pageref>266</ref>, <ref target=pb267 type=pageref>267</ref>, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>, <ref target=pb341 type=pageref>341</ref>, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>, <ref target=pb343 type=pageref>343</ref>, <ref target=pb344 type=pageref>344</ref>, <ref target=pb361 type=pageref>361</ref>.

<p><hi>Sth&amacr;pan&amacr;</hi>, prologue, <ref target=pb111 type=pageref>111</ref>, <ref target=pb112 type=pageref>112</ref>, <ref target=pb182 type=pageref>182</ref>, <ref target=pb340 type=pageref>340</ref>, <ref target=pb342 type=pageref>342</ref>, n. <ref target=n342.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>Sth&amacr;yin&imacr;</hi>, concubine, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>.

<p><hi>Sth&amacr;yibh&amacr;va</hi>, dominant emotion, <ref target=pb315 type=pageref>315</ref>, <ref target=pb320 type=pageref>320</ref>.

<p><hi>Sthitap&amacr;&tdotb;hya</hi>, standing recitation, <ref target=pb338 type=pageref>338</ref>.

<p><hi>Sthairya</hi>, steadfastness as a quality of the hero, <ref target=pb307 type=pageref>307</ref>.

<p><hi>Sn&amacr;taka</hi>, as a character, <ref target=pb313 type=pageref>313</ref>.

<p><hi>Sragdhar&amacr;</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>, <ref target=pb167 type=pageref>167</ref>, <ref target=pb181 type=pageref>181</ref>, <ref target=pb185 type=pageref>185</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>, <ref target=pb219 type=pageref>219</ref>, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>, <ref target=pb236 type=pageref>236</ref>, <ref target=pb246 type=pageref>246</ref>, <ref target=pb272 type=pageref>272</ref>.

<p><hi>Sravati</hi>, irregular form in Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb120 type=pageref>120</ref>.

<p><hi>Svagatam</hi>, aside, <ref target=pb304 type=pageref>304</ref>.

<p><hi>Svapnadoç&amacr;nana</hi>, by Bh&imacr;ma&tdotb;a, <ref target=pb239 type=pageref>239</ref>.

<p><hi>Svapnav&amacr;savadatt&amacr;</hi>, by Bh&amacr;sa, <ref target=pb91 type=pageref>91</ref>, <ref target=pb92 type=pageref>92</ref>, <ref target=pb94 type=pageref>94</ref>, <ref target=pb95 type=pageref>95</ref>, <ref target=pb103 type=pageref>103</ref>, <ref target=pb107 type=pageref>107</ref>, <ref target=pb113 type=pageref>113</ref>, <ref target=pb117 type=pageref>117</ref>, <ref target=pb118 type=pageref>118</ref>, <ref target=pb119 type=pageref>119</ref>, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>, <ref target=pb125 type=pageref>125</ref>, <ref target=pb187 type=pageref>187</ref>, n. <ref target=n187.2 type=noteref>2</ref>.

<p><hi>Svabh&amacr;vokti</hi>, vivid description, <ref target=pb161 type=pageref>161</ref>.

<p><hi>Sv&amacr;</hi>, <hi>sviy&amacr;</hi>, heroine as wife, <ref target=pb308 type=pageref>308</ref>.

<p><hi>Sv&amacr;dh&imacr;napatik&amacr;</hi>, absolute mistress, <ref target=pb309 type=pageref>309</ref>.

<p><hi>Sv&amacr;bh&amacr;vika</hi>, natural (sentiment), <ref target=pb315 type=pageref>315</ref>, n. <ref target=n315.1 type=noteref>1</ref>.

<p><hi>Sv&amacr;min</hi>, as style of the Crown Prince, <ref target=pb69 type=pageref>69</ref>, <ref target=pb71 type=pageref>71</ref>, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>Sv&amacr;min&imacr;</hi>, style of the queen, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>Sv&amacr;min&imacr;</hi>, favourite, <ref target=pb312 type=pageref>312</ref>.


<pb n=405 id=pb405 facs="f:405">
<div2 id=ix.sa.h>
<head>H</head>

<p><hi>Ha&ndota;ho</hi>, as term of address, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>Hake</hi>, <hi>hago</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>.

<p><hi>Ha&nmacr;gho</hi>, in Açvagho&sdotb;a, <ref target=pb86 type=pageref>86</ref>.

<p><hi>Hañj&amacr;</hi> (voc., <hi>Hañje</hi>), as term of address, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>Ha&ndotb;&ddotb;e</hi>, as term of address, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>Hanumann&amacr;&ldotb;aka</hi>, see <hi>Mah&amacr;n&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, <ref target=pb271 type=pageref>271</ref>.

<p><hi>Hamm&imacr;ramadamardana</hi>, by Jayasi&ndota;ha S&umacr;ri, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>&ndash;50.

<p><hi>Hayagr&imacr;vavadha</hi>, epic by Bhart&rdotb;me&ndotb;&tdotb;ha, <ref target=pb232 type=pageref>232</ref>.

<p><hi>Harakelin&amacr;&tdotb;aka</hi>, by V&imacr;saladeva Vigrahar&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>.

<p><hi><corr sic="Haragauriviv&amacr;ha">Haragaur&imacr;viv&amacr;ha</corr></hi>, by Jagajjyotirmalla, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>, n. <ref target=n76.2 type=noteref>2</ref>, <ref target=pb247 type=pageref>247</ref>, <ref target=pb248 type=pageref>248</ref>.

<p><hi>Hari&ndotb;&imacr;</hi>, metre, <ref target=pb123 type=pageref>123</ref>, <ref target=pb142 type=pageref>142</ref>, <ref target=pb166 type=pageref>166</ref>, <ref target=pb181 type=pageref>181</ref>, <ref target=pb203 type=pageref>203</ref>, <ref target=pb212 type=pageref>212</ref>.

<p><hi>Harid&umacr;ta</hi>, <ref target=pb56 type=pageref>56</ref>, <ref target=pb270 type=pageref>270</ref>.

<p><hi>Hariva&ndota;ça</hi>, <ref target=pb28 type=pageref>28</ref>, <ref target=pb47 type=pageref>47</ref>, <ref target=pb48 type=pageref>48</ref>, <ref target=pb100 type=pageref>100</ref>.

<p><hi>Har&sdotb;acarita</hi>, by B&amacr;&ndotb;a, <ref target=pb76 type=pageref>76</ref>, <ref target=pb129 type=pageref>129</ref>, <ref target=pb170 type=pageref>170</ref>, <ref target=pb364 type=pageref>364</ref>.

<p><hi>Hal&amacr;</hi>, as term of address, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>.

<p><hi>Hall&imacr;ça</hi>, a type of drama, <ref target=pb351 type=pageref>351</ref>.

<p><hi>Hall&imacr;çaka</hi>, dance, <ref target=pb99 type=pageref>99</ref>.

<p><hi>H&amacr;va</hi>, awakening of love, <ref target=pb309 type=pageref>309</ref>.

<p><hi>H&amacr;sa</hi>, mirth, as basis of sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p><hi>H&amacr;sya</hi>, the comic sentiment, <ref target=pb323 type=pageref>323</ref>.

<p><hi>H&amacr;syac&umacr;&ddotb;&amacr;ma&ndotb;i</hi>, by Vatsar&amacr;ja, <ref target=pb265 type=pageref>265</ref>.

<p><hi>H&amacr;sy&amacr;r&ndotb;ava</hi>, by Jagad&imacr;çvara, <ref target=pb261 type=pageref>261</ref>, <ref target=pb262 type=pageref>262</ref>, <ref target=pb314 type=pageref>314</ref>, n. <ref target=n314.3 type=noteref>3</ref>.

<p><hi>Hor&amacr;</hi>, or <hi>K&amacr;la</hi>, <ref target=pb146 type=pageref>146</ref>.





<pb n=406 id=pb406 facs="f:406">
<div1 id=imprint2 type=Imprint>


<p rend="center small">PRINTED IN
<lb>GREAT BRITAIN
<lb>AT THE
<lb>UNIVERSITY PRESS
<lb>OXFORD
<lb>BY
<lb>CHARLES BATEY
<lb>PRINTER
<lb>TO THE
<lb>UNIVERSITY





</div1>


<divGen type=Colophon>


</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>

<!--

CHECKLIST (X = done; / = not applicable)

Initial cleanup

[ ] Check all pb-tags, and join lines
[ ] Move all footnotes in-line
[ ] Tag headers
[X] Fix all [** Proofer comments]
[ ] Start all paragraphs with the p-tag
[ ] Change b, sc, g tags to hi tags with correct attributes.
[ ] Change tb tags to milestone tags.
[ ] Fix multiple spaces in a row
[ ] Verify all paragraphs start with p-tag, also those starting with a tag.

TEI header

[ ] Add TEI header.
[ ] Fill in details in TEI header
[ ] Verify Author dates and add to TEI header.
[ ] Document on-line scan sources.
[ ] Fill in description in noteStmt.
[ ] Fill in keywords / Subjects
[ ] Add auto-generated colophon divGen tag.
[ ] Fill in reference to LOC record (https://catalog.loc.gov/).
[ ] Fill in reference to OpenLibrary record (https://openlibrary.org).
[ ] Fill in reference to WorldCat record (source and work) (https://www.worldcat.org).
[ ] Generate unique epub-id. (https://www.guidgenerator.com/)

Verse

[ ] Tag all verse.
[ ] Apply proper indentation: rend=&ldquo;indent(2)&rdquo;

Lists

[ ] Tag all lists.

Tables

[ ] Format tables
[ ] Apply ditto-tags.

Table of Contents

[ ] Format table(s) of contents
[ ] Link entries in table of contents
[ ] Verify each link
[ ] Compare with generated table of contents

Images

[X] Include all illustrations
[X] Verify positioning of images makes sense.

Spelling

[X] Verify generated wordlist
[ ] Tag language usage

Tools

[ ] Verify Gutcheck
[ ] Verify jeebees

Miscellany

[ ] Check for [Greek: ...] notation
[ ] Curlify quotes
[ ] Check for wrong quotes
[ ] Disambiguate single quotes, apostrophes, and primes.
[ ] Unwrap lines
[ ] Check for lines not unwrapped
[ ] Verify sequence of page-numbers
[ ] Handle fractions, such as 1/2.
[ ] Converted all fragments in uppercase to mixed case.

Text Version

[ ] Remove FIGURE notations
[ ] Verify empty lines between chapter headings
[ ] Verify empty lines around poetry and lists
[ ] Center poetry
[ ] Format title page
[ ] Remove Ads
[ ] Format Tables
[ ] Verify Greek and other transliterations

Additional Checks and Edits (Add as needed for a specific book)

[ ] ....

Posting

[ ] Make sure dp-post@pgdp.net is cc-ed on upload

Post-Posting

[ ] Update status to 1.0 (i.e. Posted).
[ ] Include PG number and posting date in metadata

-->
